CASE LIBRAW
1880

SUCCESSOR TO
CLEVELAND LIBRARY
ASSOClATION
1848

AFFILlATED WITH

WESTERN RESERVE
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

1924

VOL. I : THELAUGHAJ:LE
Sron~rrsCoLLccrrD 1 3 h~ l < - I i ~ n l < n u s .
Syriac Text and Translation, with Notcs, Introduction, etc.
By E . A. Wallis Budge. 21s. net.
VOL. 11 : T H E LETTERSAND INSCIIIPIIONSOF ~ ~ ~ 3 1 3 1 ~ ~ ~ 1 1 3 1 ,
ICING OF BABYLON,
ABOUT B c. 2 2 0 0 : ti) which a r e added
a series of letters of other Icings of tile First Dynasty of
Babylon. Vol. I : Introduction and Babylonian l'cxts.
By L. W. l'iing. 21s. net.
VOL. 111 : THELETTERSA N D IKSCRIF~IONS
OF ~ A ~ I I I U X
KING OF BAIIYLON,
AHOUT R.C. 2 2 0 0 ; Lo wliich are ilrldc~l
a series of letters of other kings of tlie First D y ~ ~ a sof~ y
Babylon. Vol. I1 : Babylonian Tcxts, continued. By
L. W. Icing. 18s. net.

~ ~ H I ,

VOL. I V : THE HISTORY O F T H E VIRGIU MARY, A N D T I i E
H I S ~ R YOF THE LIICENESSOF CHRIST. VoI. I : Syriac
Texts. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 12s. 6d. nct.
VOL. V : T I ~ EHISTORYO F TIil? VIRGIN ~ I A K YAN11
,
TliB
I~ISTOI<Y
ox THE LIKENESSOF CIIRIST. VOI. I1 : English
Translations. By E. A. Wallis Budge. 10s. 6d. net.
VOL. TI : THRREPORTSO F T H E ~ ~ A G I C I A N AN11
S
ASTKOLOGEI<S
OF NINEvsn AND BABYLON.VoI. I : Cuneiform Texts. By
12. C. Ttiornpson. rzs. 6d. net.
VOL. VII : THEREPOKTSO F T H E ~ ~ A G I C I A N AND
S
ASTROLOGEI~S
OF NINEVEH
A N D BABYLON.1'01. I1 : English Translation
and Transliteration. By R. C. Thompson. 12s. 6d. net.
VOL. V I I I : THE LEITERS AND INSCXIPT.IONS
OP HA\IILUI<AUI,
ICING OF BABYLON,
ABOUT LC. 2 2 0 0 ; to \vIiich arc addcd
a series of Iettcrs of other kings of the First 1)ynasty of
Babylon. Vol. I11 : English Translations, with Tmnsliterations, Commentary, Vocabularies, Introdoc~ion, etc. By
L . W. Icing. 18s. net.
VOL. I X : T H E HISTORIESO F R A I ~ A~NI O K ~ I'THE
I Z PEIISIAN
~
A N D RABRAN
B A I < - ~ I D TVol.
~ . 1 : Syriac Texts. By E. A.
Wallis Budge. 12s. 6d. net.

THE SEVEN TABLETS OF CREATION.

Reverse.
Part af the Sixth Tablet of the Creatiou Series rccordi~~g
tile Crcntion of Man
(Hrit. hlus., No. 92,629).

O R THE BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN L E G E N D S
CONCERNING THE CREATION O F THE WORLD
AND O F MANKIND.

LDI'TEll ii"

L. W. K I N G , M.A., F.S.A.,
ASilETANT

IN l l l E D r l ~ A P l l ' l r N I OF F C V P I I A N

AN"

*SsVlal.lN

AY1IQUIIIEi

VOL. I.
ENGLISH TRANSLA TZONS, ETC.

C
faottbott :
LUZAC

AND
1902.

CO

liKIII\II

illiilU,I.

preface.
PERHAPS
no section of Babylonian literature has been
more generally studied than the legends which record
the Creation of the world. On the publication of
the late Mr. George Smith's work, " T h e Chaldean
Account of Genesis," which appeared some twentyseven years ago, it was recognized that there was
in the Babylonian account of the Creation, as it
existed in the seventh century before Christ, much
which invited comparison with the corresponding
narrative in the Booli of Genesis. It is true that the
Babylonian legends which had been recovered and
were first published by him were very fragmentary,
and that the exact number and order of the Tablets,
or sections, of which they were composed were quite
uncertain ; and that, although they recorded the
creation of the heavens and of the heavenly bodies,
they contained no direct account of the creation of
man. In spite of this, however, their resemblance
to the Hebrew narrative was unmistakable, and in
consequence they at once appealed to a far larger
circle of students than would otherwise have been
the case.
After the appearance of Mr. Smith's worli, other
scholars produced translations of the fragments which

.---p--p-

---

-

~

he had published, and the names of Oppert, Schrader,
and Sayce will always be associated with those who
were the first to devote themselves to the interpretation of the Creation Legends.
Moreover,
new fragments of the legends have from time to
time been acquired by the Trustees of the British
Museum, and of these the most important is the
fine text of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation
Series, containing the account of the fight between
the god Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, which
was published in 1887 by Dr. Wallis Budge, and
translated by Professor Sayce in the same year.
Professor Sayce's translation of the Creation Legends
marked a distinct advance upon those of his predecessors, and it was the most complete, inasmuch
as he was enabled to make use of the new tablet
which restored so much of the central portion of the
story. In the year 1890, in his important worlc
Die KosmoLogie der BabyZonier, Professor Jensen of
Marburg gave a translation of the legends together
with a transliteration and commentary ; in 1895
Professor Zimmern of Leipzig translated all the
fragments then known, and a year later Professor
Delitzsch of Berlin also published a rendering.
Finally, two years ago, Professor Jensen issued a new
and revised translation of the Creation Legends in the
opening pages of the iirst part of his worlc Mythen
und Epen, the second part of which, containing his
notes and commentary, appeared some months ago.

I n the course of the year ~ g o o ,the writer was
entrusted with the task of co1;ying the texts of a number
of Babylonian and Assyrian legends for publication
in the series of CzcnezJvrm T e x t s f r o m Ua(iyLoniarc
Tablets, etc., in the B r i t i s h M z ~ s e z ~ ? and,
n , among the
documents selected for issue, were those relating
to the Creation of the world. Several of the texts
of the Creation Legends, which had been used by
previous translators, had never been published, and
one tablet, which Mr. George Smith had co~lsultecl
in 1876, had not been identified by subsequent
worlters. During my work I was so fortunate as to
recogliize this tablet, and was e~lableclto 111alte copies
of all the texts, not only of those which were previously
known, but also of a number of new duplicates and
fragments which I had meanwhile identified. These
copies appeared in C z ~ n e ( f o w ~ zT e x t s , Part X I I I
( ~ g o r ) ,Plates 1-41. T h e most interesting of the
new fragments there published was a tablet which
restored a missing portion of the text of the Second
Tablet of the Creation Series, and of this, on account
of its interest, I gave a translatioll in a note to the
plate on which the text appeared. It was not lily
intention at that time to publish anything further
upon the subject of the Creation Legends.
\;\'hile I was engaged, ho\+-ever, in searching for
fragments of other Babylonian legends for publication
officially, it was 111y good fortune to come across
a fine cl~~plicatc
of the Second Tablet of the Cre.rl t'loll

XIV

PKLFACE.

Series. A further prolonged search was rewarded
by the finding of other fragments of the poem, and
a study of these showed me that the earlier portions
of the text of the Creation Story, as already known,
could be considerably augmented. Among them,
moreover, was a fragment of the poem which refers
to the Creation of Man ; this fragment is extremely
important, for in addition to its valuable contents it
also settles the disputed question as to the number of
Tablets, or sections, of which the Creation Series was
composed. I n view of the additional il~formationas
to the form and contents of the poem which this new
material afforded, it was clearly necessary that a new
translation of the Creation Legends should be made,
and this I undertook forthwith.
The new fragments of the poem which I had
identified up to the summer of last year are inscribed
upon tablets of the Neo- Babylonia11 period. At
the conclusion of the examination of tablets of this
class, I lithographed the newly identified texts in
a series of plates which are published in the second
volume of the present work. These plates were
already printed off, when, at the beginning of the
present year, after my return from Assyria, I identified
a fresh group of fragments of the poem inscribed,
not upon Neo-Babylonian, but upon Assyrian tablets.
At that time I was engaged on making a detailed
catalogue, or hand-list, of the smaller fragments in
the various collections of Assyrian tablets from

Kuyunjili, and, as a result of previous study of the
legends themselves and of the Assyrian commentaries
to the Seventh Tablet of the series, I was enabled
to identify ten new fragments of the poem which are
inscribed up011 tablets from the library of Ashurbani-pal at Nineveh. In order to avoid upsetting the
arrangement of the plates in Vol. 11, the texts of
the new Assyrian fragments are published by means
of outline bloclis in Appendices I and I1 to the
present volume.
Those who have studied the publishecl texts of the
Creation Series will remerllber that the material used
by previous translators of the legends has consisted
of some twenty-one tablets ;ind fragments inscribed
with .portions of the poem. T h e number of new
tablets and fragments belonging to the Creation Series
which are here used and tra~lslatecl for the first time
reaches the total of thirty-four, but, as I have joined
up six of these to other similar fragments, this total
has been reduced to twenty-eight. Thus, in place
of the twenty-one tablets previously linown, fortynine separate tablets and fragments have now been
identified as containing portio~ls of the text of the
Creation Series.
T h e new information, furnished by the recently
discovered material reglrding the Story of Creation,
may here be briefly summarized.
Hitherto our
knowledge of the contents of Tablets I and I1 of
the series has been very fragmentary.
After the
~

-

XVI

~

~

PREFACE.

narrative of the creation of the great gods in the
opening lines of the poem, and a fragmentary
reference to the .first symptoms of revolt exhibited
by the primeval monsters, Apsii and Tiamat, and
Mummu, the minister of Apsu, there occurred a great
gap in the text, and the story began again with the
account of how Tiamat prepared to wage war against
the gods. ApsE and Mummu have a t this point
entirely disappeared from the narrative, and the ally
of Tiamat is the god Kingu, whom she appoints to
command her forces. What followed the creation of
the great gods, what was the cause of the revolt, what
was the fate of Apsu and Mummu, and what were the
events which led up to Tiamat's preparations for
battle, are questions that have hitherto remained
unanswered. W e now know that the accoutit of the
creation of the gods was no fuller than that which
has come down to us from Damascius. After the
birth of Lakhmu and Lakhamu, Anshar and Kishar,
Anu, Re1 (i.e., Enlil, or Illil), and E a (Nudimmud),
the text does not proceed to narrate in detail the
coming forth of the lesser deities, but plunges at once
into the story of the revolt of the primeval forces of
chaos. W e now know also that it was Apsii, and not
Tiamat, who began the revolt against the gods; and
that, according to the poem, his enmity was aroused,
not by the creation of light as has been previously
suggested, but by the disturbance of his rest in
consequence of the new " w a y " of the gods, which
tended to produce order in place of chaos.

PREFACE.

XVII

One of the most striking facts which the new
fragments furnish with regard to the contents of the
legends is the prominent part played by the god E a
in the earlier episodes of the story. After Apse and
Mummu had repaired to Tiamat and had hatched with
her their t lot against the gods, it was the god Ea,
who, abounding in all wisdom, detected their plan and
frustrated it. T h e details of Ea's action are still
a matter of uncertainty, but, as I have shown in the
Introduction, it is clear that A p s i and Mummu were
overthrown, and that their conqueror was Ea. Moreover, it was only after their downfall, and in order
to avenge them, that Tiamat began her preparations
for battle. She was encouraged in her determination
by the god Icingu, and it was in consequence of the
assistance he then gave her that she afterwards
appointed him leader of her host.
Another point which is explained by the new
fragments concerns the repetitions in Tablets I, 11,
and 111 of the lines containing the account of Tiamat's
preparations for battle. T h e lines describing this
episode are given no less than four times : in Tablet I,
in Tablet 11, and twice in Tablet 111. W e now
know that the first description of Tiamat's preparations
occurs after the account of her determination to avenge
her former allies ; and in the Second Tablet the lines
are put into the mouth of E a , who continues to play
a prominent part in the narrative, and carries the
tidings to Anshar. How Anshar repeated the lines
B

XVIII

PREFACE.

to Gaga, his messenger, and how Gaga delivered the
message to Lakhmu and Lalthamu, is already well
known.
Perhaps the most striking of all the new fragments
of the poem here published is that which contains the
opening and closing lines of the Sixth Tablet, and, at
last, furnishes us with a portion of the text describing
the Creation of Man. W e now linow that, as in the
Hebrew narrative, the culminating act of Creation was
the malting of man. Marclult is here represented as
declaring to E a that he will create man from his ow11
blood, and from bone which he will form ; it is important to note that the Assyrian word here used for
"bone," isSimtu, which has not hitherto been known,
corresponds to the Hebrew word 'e;em, "bone," which
occurs in G,en. ii, 2 3 , in connection with the account
of the creation of woman. The text thus furnishes
another point of resemblance between the Babylonian
and the Hebrew stories of Creation. T h e new
fragment also corroborates in a remarkable degree
the account given by Berossus of the Babylonian
version of the creation of man. According to the
writer's rendering of the passage, Marduk declares
that he will use his own blood in creating mankind,
and this agrees with the statement of Berossus, that
Bd directed one of the gods to cut off his (i.e. Bel's)
head, and to form manltind from his blood mixed with
earth. This subject is discussed at length and in detail
in the Introduction, as well as a number of new points

PREFACE.

XIX

of resemblance between the Babylonian and the
Hebrew accounts of the Creation which are furnished
by other recently identified fragments of the poem.
With regard to the extent and contents of the
Creation Series, we now know that the Tablets of
which the series was colnposed are seven in number ;
and we also possess the missing context or framework of the Seventh Tablet, which contains addresses
to Marduk under his fifty titles of honour. From
this we learn that, when the work of Creation was
ended, the gods gathered together once more in
Upshukkinakku, their council - chamber ; here they
seated themselves in solemn assembly and proceeded
to do honour to Marduk, the Creator, by reciting
before him the remarkable series of addresses which
form the contents of the last Tablet of the poem.
Many of the missing portions of the Seventh Tablet,
including the opening lines, it has been found possible
to restore from the new fragments and duplicates
here published.
In the following pages a transliteration of the text
of the Creation Series is given, which has been
constructed from all the tablets and fragments now
known to be inscribed with portions of the poem,
together with a translation and notes. For comparison with the legends contained in the Creation
Series, translations have been added of the other
Babylonian accounts of the history of Creation, and
of some texts closely connected therewith. Among

XX

PREFACE

these mention may be made of the extracts from
a Sumerian text, and from a somewhat similar one
in Babylonian, referring to the Creation of the Moon
and the Sun ; these are here published from a so-called
" practice-tablet," or student's exercise. A remarkable
address to a mythical river, to which the creation of
the world is ascribed, is also given.
I n the first Appendix the Assyrian commentaries to
the Seventh Tablet are examined in detail, and some
fragments of texts are described which bear a striking
resemblance to the Seventh Tablet, and are of considerable interest for the light they throw on the
literary history of the poem. Among the texts dealt
with in the second Appendix one of the most interesting
is a Babylonian duplicate of the tablet which has been
supposed to contain the instructions given by Marduli
to man after his creation, but is now shown by the
duplicate to be part of a long didactic composition
containing moral precepts, and to have nothing to do
with the Creation Series. Similarly, in the fourth
Appendix I have printed a copy of the text which has
been commonly, but erroneously, supposed to refer to
the Tower of Babel. The third Appendix includes
some hitherto unpublished astrological texts of the
period of the Arsacidae, which contain astrological
interpretations and explanations of episodes of the
Creation story; they indicate that Tiamat, in her
astrological character, was regarded as a star or
constellation in the neighbourhood of the ecliptic,

PREFACE.

XXI

and they moreover furnish an additional proof of
'the identification of her monster brood with at any
rate some of the Zodiacal constellations.
During the preparation of this work I have, of
course, consulted the translations and renderings of
the Creation Legends which have been made by
other workers on the subject, and especially those
of Professors Jensen, Zimmern, and Delitzsch. I have
much pleasure in expressing here my indebtedness to
their published works for suggestions which I have
adopted from them.
T o Mr. R. Campbell Thompson I am indebted for
the ready assistance he has afforded me during my
search for new fragments and duplicates of the
legends.
In conclusion, my thanks are due to Dr. Wallis
Budge for his friendly suggestions which I have
adopted throughout the progress of the work.

L. W. KING.

PREFACE . . . .
INTRODUCTION :-

PAOZ

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

XI

I. DESCRIPTION AND LITERATURE O F T H E POEM

. . . . . . . . . . .

XXV

11. CONIENTS O F T H E POEM AND DISCUSSION O F
NEW MATERIAL
111. COMPOSITION O F T H E POEM

LXVI

ENUM.4 ELISH

. . . . . . . . . . .

XXX

. . . . . . .

1V. DATE AND ORIGIN O F T H E BABYLONIAN CREATION
LEGENDS
V. INFLUENCE
LEGENDS

. . . . . . . . . . . . .
OF

THE

AND

LITERATURE

PARALLELS

LXXII

CREATION

BABYLONIAN
IN

HEBREW

. . . . . . . . . . . .

LXXX

VI. AUTHORITIES FOR T H E TEXT O F T H E POEM ENUMR

.

ELlSH AND T H E ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES.

XCVII

VII. RECONSTRUCTION AND ARRANGEMENT O F T H E TEXT

CXX

TRANSLITERATIONS AND TRANSLATIONS :TABLETS
OF THE HISTORY
OF CREATION.
I. THESEVEN

.
111. T H E T H I R D TABLET .
IV. THE FOURTH TABLET.
V. T H E F I F T H TABLET
.
VI. THE SIXTH TABLET
.
~ I I THE
.
SEVENTH TABLET
EPILOGUE
. . . .
I. T H E FIRST TABLET

11. T H E SECOND T A B L E T .

11. OTHER ACCOUNTSOB

. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

THE

. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

2
22

38
58

78
86
92
1 10

HISTORYOF CREATION.

I. ANOTHER VERSION OF THE DRAGOX-MYTH

. . .

116

11. A REFERENCE TO T H E CREATION O F T H E CATTLE

. . . . . .

AND T H E BEASTS O F T H E FIELD
111. A REFERENCE TO T H E CREATION O F T H E MOON
ANDTHESUN
IV. A N ADDRESS TO THE RIVER OF CREATION
V.

. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .
ANOTHER VERSION O F T H E CREATION O F T H E
WORLD BY MARDUK . . . . . . . . . .

VI. T H E "CUTHAEAN LEGEND OF T H E CREATION"

.

.

I22
124
128

I3O
140

XXIV

CONTENTS

PAGE

APPENDICES :I. ASSYRIAN
TO

SERIES
11. ON

COMMENTARIES AND

THE

SEVENTH

TABLET

PARALLEL

TEXTS

O F T H E CREATION

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SOME

FRAGMENTS

OF

THE

SERIES

157

ENUMA

ELISH, AND ON SOME TEXTS RELATING TO T H E
HISTORY OF CREATION

. . . . . . . . .

182

111. ON SOME TRACES O F T H E HISTORY OF CREATION
I N RELIGIOUS AND ASTROLOGICAL LITERATURE

.

204

IV. SUPPOSED ASSYRIAN LEGENDS OF T H E TEMPTATION

. . . . . . .

AND THE TOWER O F BABEL
V. A "PRAYER
ISHTAR

O F T H E RAISING O F T H E HAND"

2'9

TO

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

222

INDICES, GLOSSARY, ETC.:I. 'INDEX TO TEXTS.
A. CUNEIFORM TEXTS FROM BABYLONIAN TABLETS,
ETC., I N T H E BRITISH MUSEUDI, PART XI11

. . . . . . . .

(I~oI),PLATES 1-41

239

B; SUPPLEMENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED I N VOL. 11,
PLATES I-LFXIV

. . . . . . . . .

241

C. SUPPLEhIENTARY TEXTS, PUBLISHED IN APPEN-

. .

DICES I, II, AND I I I .

. . . . . . . .
. . . . .

11. INDEX TO R E G I S T R A T I O N N U M B E R S .
111. GLOSSARY OF SELECTED WORDS

. . . . . . .

IV. INDEX TO NAMES OF DEITIES, STARS, PLACES, ETC.
. .

PLATES :I. T H E SIXTH TABLET O F T H E CREATION SERIES
11. T H E FIRST TABLET OF T H E CREATION SERIES

..
.
.
. .
.

244

245
251
266

VIII

.XXXV

111. T H E SECOND TABLET O F T H E CREATION SERIES

XLIII

IV. T H E FOURTH TABLET OP T H E CREATION SERIES

.XLVII

v.

THE FIFTH TABLET O F THE CREATION SERIES

VI. T H E SEVENTH TABLET O F T H E CREATION SERIES

LI
LXI

Jnfrobucfion.
THEgreat Assyrian poem, or series of legends, which TheCreat~on
Scner,

narrates the story of the Creation of the world and of eltih.
"Enuma
man, was termed by the Assyrians and Babylonians
Enunza elif, "When in the height," from the two
opening words of the text. T h e poem consisted of
some nine hundred and ninety-four lines, and was
divided into seven sections, each of which was inscribed
upon a separate Tablet. T h e Tablets were numbered
by the Assyrian scribes, and the separate sections of
the poem written upon them do not vary very much
in length. T h e shortest Tablet contains one hundred
and thirty-eight lines, and the longest one hundred and
forty-six, the average length of a Tablet being about
one hundred and forty-two lines. T h e poem embodies
the beliefs of the Babylonians and Assyrians concerning the origin of the universe; it describes the
coming forth of the gods from chaos, and tells the
story of how the forces of disorder, represented by
the primeval water-gods Apsii and Tiamat, were overthrown by E a and Marduk respectively, and how
Marduk, after completing the triumph of the gods over
chaos, proceeded to create the world and man. T h e
poem is known to us from portions of several Assyrian
and late-Babylonian copies of the work, and from

Series,
Thecreation

" Enuma
dish.''

First
publication f
fmgmentsof
the legends by
F;;s,Smith

extracts from it written out upon the so-called "practicetablets," or students' exercises, by pupils of the
Babylonian scribes. The Assyrian copies of the work
are from the great library which was founded at
Nineveh by Ashur-bani-pal, king of Assyria from
B.C. 668 to about B.C. 626 ; the Babylonian copies and
extracts were inscribed during the period of the kings
of the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods ; and one
copy of the Seventh Tablet may probably be assigned
to as late a date as the period of the Arsacidae.
All the tablets and fragments, which have hitherto
been identified as inscribed with portions of the text
of the poem, are preserved in the British Museum.
From. the time of the first discovery of fragments
~f the poem considerable attention has been directed
towards them, for not only are the legends themselves
the principal source of our knowledge of the Babylonian costnogony, but passag-es in them bear a strilring
resemblance to the cognate narratives in the Book
of Genesis concerning the creation of the world.
T h e late Mr. George Smith, who was the first to
~ u b l i s han account of the poem, recognized this
resemblance and emphasized it in his papers on
In the following year in
the subject in 1875.'

' Mr. Smith described the legends in a letter to the Daily
Telegraph, published on March 4th, 1875, No. 6,158, p. j, col. 4.
He there gave a summary of the contents of the fragments, and on
November 2nd in the same year he read a paper on them before the

THE CREATION LEGENDS.

XXVII

his work " T h e Chaldean Account of Genesis " ' sm,th..
publication of
he gave translations of the fragments of the poem thelcpends.
which had been identified, and the copies which he
had made of the principal fragments were p ~ b l i s h e d . ~
After Smith's death the interest in the texts which he
had published did not cease, and scholars continued
to produce renderings and studies of the legendss
~ o c i e t y o Biblical
f
Archieology. I n noting the resemblance between
the Babylonian and the Hebrew legends it was not unnatural that
he should have seen a closer resemblance between them than was
really the case. For instance, he traced allusions to " t h e Fall of
Man" in what is the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series; one
tablet he interpreted as containing the instructions given by "the
Deity" to man after his creation, and another he believed to
represent a version of the story of the Tower of Babel. Although
these identificationswere not justified, the outline which he gave
of the contents of the legends was remarkably accurate. I t is
declared by some scholars that the general character of the larger
of the Creation fragments was correctly identified by Sir H. C.
Rawlinson several years before.
' The Chaldean Account of Genesis, London, 1876 ; German
edition, edited by Delitzsch, Leipzig, 1876. New English edition,
edited by Sayce, London, 1880.
By November, 1875. Smith had prepared a series of six plates
containing copies of portions of the First and Fifth Tablets, and
also of the Fourth Tablet which he entitled "War between the
Gods and Chaos," and of the Seventh Tablet which he styled
"Tablet describing the Fall." These plates were published in
the Transactions of the Socieb of Bdlical A~ch@oZogy,vol. iv (1876).
and appeared after his death.
3 See the papers by H. Fox Talbot in
T.S.B.A., vol. iv,
pp. 349 ff., and vol. v, pp. I ff., 426 ff., and Records of the Past,
"01. ix ( 1 8 7 7 ) ~pp. I I j ff., I 35 ff. ; and the translations made by
Oppert in an appendix to Ledrain's Histoire d'lsrael, gremikyc
partie (1879), p p 411ff., and by Lenormant in Les o~iginesde

XXVIII

Recent transluuons of the
legends.

INTRODUCTION.

In 1883 Dr. Wallis Budge gave an account of a fine
Babylonian duplicate of what proved to be the Fourth
Tablet of the Creation Series ; this document restored
considerable portions of the narrative of the fight
between Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, and added
considerably to our knowledge of the story of Creation
and of the order in which the events related in the
story took place.' In the Hibbert Lectures for 1887
Professor Sayce translated the new fragment of the
text,= and in the following year published a complete
translationS of all fragments of the Creation Legends
which had up to that time been identified. In 1890
Professor Jensen, in his studies on the Babylonian
cosmogony, included a translation of the legends
together with a transliteration and a number of
valuable philological notes and discussion^.^ In 1895

I'histoire (1880), app. i, pp. qgqff. T h e best discussion of the
relations of the legends to the early chapters of Genesis was
given by Schrader in the second edition (1883) of his Keilinschrvten und das Alte Testament, English translation, 1885-1888 ;
I hear from Professor Zimmern that the new edition of this work,
a portion of which he is editing, will shortly make its appearance.
T h e tablet was numbered 82-9-18, 3,737 ; see below, p. cvi,
No. 29. Budge gave a description of the tablet in the Proceedings
of the Society of Biblical Archeology for Nov. bth, 1883, and
published the text in P.S.B.A., vol. x (1887), p. 86, pls. 1-6.
See Lectures on ihe Ongin and Growth of Religion as illustrated
6y the Religtbn of the Ancient BaJylonians (Hihbert Lectures for
1887)z PP. 379 ff.
a I n Records ofthe Past, new series, vol. i (1888), pp. 1 2 2 ff.
See Die Kosmologie der Ba6ylonier (Strassburg, 18go), pp. 263 ff.

PREVIOUS TRANSLATIONS.

XXIX

Professor Zimmern published a translation of the
translations of the
legends, similar in plan to Sayce's earlier edition ; in legends.
it he took advantage of some recently identified
fragments and duplicates, and put forward a number
of new renderings of difficult passages.' In 1896
a third German translation of the legends made its
appearance ; it was published by Professor Delitzsch
and included transliterations and descriptions of the
various tablets and fragments inscribed with portions
of the text.% Finally, in 1900 Professor Jensen
published a second edition of his rendering of the
legends in his Mythen und Epen ; this worli was
the best which could be prepared with the material
then a ~ a i l a b l e . ~
Zimmern published his translation as an appendix to Gunkel's
Schopfung nnd Chaos in Urzeit und Endzel (Gottingen, 1895),
pp. 401 ff.
Das Ba6ylonische Wellschojfungsepos, published in the A6hondlungen der philologOch-hisforischen Classe der K i n i ' . Siichsirchen
Gesellzchaft dtr Wirsenschafllen,xvii, No. ii.
Assyrisch-Ba6j,lonLciie Mythen und Epen, published as the sixth
volume of Schrader's Keilinschrz~ilicheB~bliofhek; part r , containing
transliterations and translations (1900); part 2, containing commentary (1901).
I n addition t o the translations of the legends mentioned in
the text, a number of papers and works containing descriptions
and discussions of the Creation legends have from time to time
been published. Among those which have appeared during the
last few years may he mentioned the translations of portions of
Texl6uch z u n ~
the legends by Winckler in his Xeili~~schr~~lliches
ANen Testament, ii (1892), pp. 88ff.; Barton's article on Tiamat,
published in the journal of /he American Onknfal SocieQ, vol. xv
(1893)~ pp. I ff.; and the translations and discussions of the

XXX

INTROUUCTION.

~ d ~ ~ t i f i ~ I~n tthe
i ~ most
~

of new texts.

recent translations of the Creation Series,
those of Delitzsch and Jensen, use was made in all of
twenty-one separate tablets and fragments which had
been identified as inscribed with portions of the text
of the poem.'
I n the present work thirty-four

legends given in Jastrow's Religion ofBa6ylonzi and Assyn'a (1898),
pp. 407ff., in my own Babylonian Zelglbn and Myihology (1899),
pp. 53 ff., by Rlc~ss-Arnoltin As~yrianand Babylonian Literafure,
edited by R.F. Harper (,go,), pp. 281 ff., and by Loisy, Lcs myfies
babylontkns e f les premzPrs chapitres de la Gen2se (rgor). Discussions
of the Babylonian Creation legends and their connection with
the similar narratives in Genesis have been given by Lukas in
Die Grund6egrtYe in den Ifosmogonien der alfen V3ker (1893),
pp. 1-46, by Gunkel in Schbpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit
(1895), pp. 16 ff., by Driver in Au/huri& and Archeology, edited
by Hogarth (1899), pp. gff., and by Zimmern in Bi6lische und
bnbylontsche Urgeschichte (Der alfe Orient, ,901); an exhaustive
article on "Creation" has also been contributed by Zimmern
and Cheyne to the Encyclopedia Biblica, vol. i (1899), cols. 938 ff.
Delitzsch's list of fragments, enumerated on pp. 7 ff. of
his work, gave the total number as twenty-two. As No. zr he
included the tablet I<. 3.364, but in Appendix I1 (pp. 2 0 1 ff.)
I have proved, by means of the Neo-Babylonian duplicate No.
33,851, that this tablet is part of a long composition containing
m d a l precepts, and has no connection with the Creation Series.
H e also included K. 3,445 R. 396 (as No. zo), but there are
strong reasons for believing that this tablet does not belong to the
series Enuma elii", but is part of a variant account of the story of
Creation; see further, Appendix 11, pp. 197ff. On the other
hand he necessarily omitted from his list an unnumbered fragment
of the Seventh Tablet, which had been used by George Smith,
but had been lost sight of after his death; this fragment I
identified two years ago a s I<. 9,267. I t may be added that the
total number of fragments ,correctly identified up to that time n,as
twenty-five, but, as four of these had been joined to others, the
number of separate tablets and fragments was reduced to twenty-one.

'

+

TIlE NEW MATERIAL.

XXXI

additional tablets and fragments, inscribed with ?,";!:$;
portions of the text of the Creation Series, have been
employed; but, as six of these join other similar
fragments, the number of separate tablets and
fragments here used for the first time is reduced to
twenty-eight. T h e total number of separate fragments
of the text of the Creation Series is thus brought up
to forty-nine.' T h e new material is distributed among
the Seven Tablets of the Creation Series as follows :T o the four known fragments of the First Tablet
may now be added eight others,= consisting of two
fragments of an Assyrian tablet and four Babylonian
fragments and two extracts inscribed upon Babylotlia~l
" practice-tablets." T o the three known fragments
of the Second Tablet may be added four other^,^
consisting of parts of one Assyrian and of three
Babylonian tablets. T o the four lrnown fragments
of the Third Tablet may be added five o t l ~ e r s , ~

'

On pp. xcvii ff. brief descriptions are given of these fortynine separate fragments of the Creation Series, together with
references to previous publications in which the text of any of
them have appeared. T h e whole of the old material, together with
part of the new, was published in Cuneifom Textsfrom Ba&lonian
Tablets, efc., in the B r i f k h Museum, part xiii. T h e texts of the
new tablets and fragments which I have since identified are
published in the lithographed plates of Vol. 11, and by means of
outline blocks in Appendices I and I1 (see pp. 159 ff.). For the
circumstances under which the new fragments were identified, see
the Preface to this volume.
See below, p. xcviiif., Nos. 3, 4, 5 , 8, 9, 10, 11, and 1 2 .
See below, p. ci, Nos. 13, I + , 1 5 , and 1 8 .
See below, p. ciii f., Nos. zz, 24, zg, 26, and 2.7.

'

XXXII

Identification
ofnew texts.

Thebirthof
the gods.

INTRODUCTION.

consisti~lg of fragments of one Assyrian and one
Babylonian tablet and extracts inscribed upon three
Babylonian " practice-tablets." T o the five known
fragments of the Fourth Tablet only one new duplicate
can be added,' which is inscribed upon a Babylonian
"practice-tablet." T o the three known fragments of
the Fifth Tablet may be added two others,%consisting
of parts of two Assyrian tablets. Of the Sixth
Tablet no fragment has previously been known, and
its existence was only inferred from a fragment of the
catch-line preserved on copies of the Fifth Tablet ;
fragments of the text of the Sixth Tablet are published
for the first time in the present work from part of
a Babylonian tablet.3 Finally, to the two known
fragments of the Seventh Tablet may now be added
seven other^,^ inscribed upon five Assyrian fragments
and portions of two Babylonian tablets.
T h e new fragments of the text of the First and
Second Tablets of the Creation Series throw light
on the earlier episodes in the story of Creation, and
enable us to fill up some of the gaps in the narrative.
By the identification of the Tablet K. 5,41gc,' George
Smith recovered the opening lines of the First Tablet,
which describes the condition of things before Creation
See below, p. cvi, No.

32.

* See below, p. cviii, Nos.

37 and 38.
See below, p. cix, No. 40.
See below, p. cixf., Nos. 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, and 49.
See below, p. xcviif., No. I .

T H E NETT' MATERIAL.

SSXIII

when the primeval water-gods, Apsii and Tiamat, per- . r h ~birth of
the garis.
sonifying chaos, mingled their waters in confusion. T h e
text then briefly relates how to Apsu and Tiamat were
born the oldest of the gods, the first pair, Lal~muand
Labarnu, being followed after a long interval by Anshar
and Kishar, and after a second interval by other deities,
only preserves
of whose names the text of K. 5 , 4 1 9 ~
that of Anu. George Smith perceived that this
theogony had been reproduced by Damascius in his
summary of the beliefs of the Babylonians concerning
the creation of the world.' Now, since Uamascius
mentions "Ihhrvos and 'A& along with 'Avhs, it was
clear that the text of the poem included a clescriptio~l
of the birth of the elder Bel (i.e. Enlil or Illil) and of
E a in the passage in which Anu's name occurs. But
as the text inscribed upon the obverse of K. 5,419c,

' The following is the text of the passage in which Damascius
summarizes the Babylonian beliefs: - T ; v
8; Bup/3;pwu 6 0 L ; r r o ~
BapuLdv,oc ,A& 74" p , I a ~T&Y Zhwu LPX$v
wnl)tCun~,860 8; TOLL?^
'I'auB; ~ a 2
XwaaAv, ?;lv p2u 'Awaliljv uYv8pn ?rj;TauR; Z O L O ~ Y T L S , ~ < L ~ I I , I I
t
8; $ r l ~ ; I , mRcGn 6uop;covrsr, c'f G u povorlevv waisa y ~ v v r , O ~ v a.i;lv
MwGpiv, a$?;" olpar 7;" YO?)?;^" K ; < ~ O "F . i T&" BUD?" ,illX&" wtl/,nrldpeuav.
'Ex 62 i l j v u b G v uYXXrlu rlrvs;u wpoeXRciv, AnX$" x s l ArrXd8i.
E&a a3 r p l ~ ~;w v iWv d,&u, l i ~ r ~ o nrrri
~ $ 'Accwp;lu, L'f Gv -jcvCaOn~
r p ~ i r ', A v i v ua; " I h X ~ u o uw a l ' A d v i o G 62 'Aub xal A n i x l l r u i i v ycv<oRnr
7;" Bchov, $ v 6 ? i ~ ~ o v p 7 ;r&ni
l u $no~v.-Quaesliones de pyinus princijris,
cap. 1 2 5 (ed. Kopp, p. 384). T h e Aaxqu and A a ~ o vof the teat
should be emended to A o ~ ~ and
j v A o ~ u v ,which correspond to
Lahamu and Labmu. Of the other deities, TauRL corresponds
to Kishar, 'Aoompd* to Anshar,
to Tiamat, 'Awoodv to Apsi~.K<oaap~j
and 'A& to Anu; Mwupis corresponds to Iklummu (see below,

p. xxxviii, note

I).
I
:

XXXIV

Thebirthof
the gods.

~

the birth of
unlduk

INTRODUCTION.

and of its Neo-Babylonian duplicate 82-7-14, 402,'
breaks off at 1. 15, the course of the story after this
point has hitherto been purely a matter for conjecture.
It appeared probable that the lines which followed
contained a full account of the origin of the younger
gods, and from the fact that Damascius states that
Bijhos, the Creator of the world, was the son of )A&(i.e. Ea) and A c c ; ~ ~(i.e. Damkina), it has been
concluded that at any rate special prominence was
given to the birth of Bel, i.e. Marduk, who figurcs
so prominently in the story from the close of the
Second Tablet onwards.
T h e new
fragments
of ~the First~ Tablet i show that
~
~
~
~
the account of the birth of the gods in the Creation
Series is even shorter than that given by Damascius,
for the poem contains no mention of the birth and
parentage of Marduli. After mentioning the birth of
Nudimmud (i.e. Ea),2 the text proceeds to describe
his marvellous wisdom and strength, and states that
he had no rival among the gods ; the birth of no
other god is recorded after that of Ea, and, when
Marduk is introduced later on, his existence, like that
of Mummu and of Gaga, appears to be tacitly assumed.
It would seem, therefore, that the reference made by

' See below, p. xcviii, No.

2.

I t is interesting to note that E a is referred to under his own
name and not by his title Nudimmud upon new fragments of the
poem inTabl. I , I. 60 (p. 1 2 f.), Tahl. 11, 1. 5 (p. z z f.), and Tabl. VI,
1. 3 (p. 86 f.) and 1. I I (p. 88 f.).

~

~

~

Part of the First Tablet of tile Creation Series (Brit. Mas., No. 4;,;28i-46,614).

THE NEW MATERIAL.

XSXX.11

Damascius to Marduk's parentage was not derived
from the text of the Creation Series, but was added
by him to complete his summary of the Babylonian
beliefs concerning the origin of the gods.
This omission of Marduk's name from the earlier E, tee h,,, ,i
the earlirr part
lines of the First Tablet and the prominence given or t h creation
~
story.
to that of E a may at first sight seem strange, but it
is in accordance with the other newly recovered
portions of the text of the First and Second Tablets,
which indirectly throw an interesting light on the
composite character and literary history of the great
poem.' I t will be seen that of the deities mentioned
in these earlier lines Nudimmud (Ea) is the only god
whose characteristics are described in detail ; his birth,
moreover, forms the climax to which the previous
lines lead up, and, after the description of his character,
the story proceeds at once to relate the rebellion of
the primeval gods and the part which E a played in.
detecting and frustrating their plans. In fact, Ea and
not Marduk is the hero of the earlier episodes of the
Creation story.
The new fragments of the text show, moreover, ~
b
A ass
that it was Apsi and not Tiamat who began thereielliOn.
rebellion against the gods. While the newly created,
gods represented the birth of order and system in the
universe, Apsfi and Tiamat still remained in confusion
and undiminished in might. ApsLi, however, finding

'

Sec lurther, pp. lxvi ff.

~

~

~

XXXVIII

Thecauseof
Apsu's
i

.

INTKODUCTION.

that his slothful rest was disturbed by the new ordcr
of beings whom he had begotten, summoned Mummu,'
his minister, and the two went together to Tiamat,
and lying down before her, took counsel with her

'

T h e MwCpir of Damascius ; see above, p. xxxiii, n. I . T h e
title Mummu was not only borne by Apsu's minister, who, according
to Darnascius, was the son of Apsu and Tiamat, but in Tabl. I , I. 4,
it is employed as a prefix to the name of Tiamat herself. I n this
passage I have conjecturally rendered it as chaos" (see p. z f.),
since the explanatory text S. 747, Rev., I. l o (see below,
pp. 16z, 170)~gives the equation Mu-um-mu = ?if-mu. There is,
however, much to be said for Jensen's suggestion of the existence
of a word mummu meaning "form," or "mould," or "pattern"
(cf. Mythen und Epen, p. 302 f.). Jensen points out that E a is
termed mu-um-mu & - a n ka-la, <'the mummu (possibly, pattern)
who created all" (cf. Beitriige zur Asyriolofie, ii, p. 2 6 1 ) , and he
adds that the title might have been applied in this sense to
Tiamat, since in Tabl. I, 1. I I j, and the parallel passages, she is
described as pa-ti-$a-at ha-la-ma, and from her body heaven and
earth were created ; the explanation, given by Damascius, of
Mummu, the son of Apsu and Tiamat, as voviis xdopor is also
in favour of this suggestion. Moreover, from one of the new
fragments of the Seventh Tablet, I<. 13,761 (seep. 1 0 2 f.), we now
know that one of Marduk's fifty titles was Mummu, which is there
explained'as ha-a[n . . 1, i.e., probably, 6a-a[n ka-la], "Creator
[of all] " (cf. Ea's title, cited above). I n view of the equation
Mu-um-mu = rig-mu (Jensen's suggested alternatives Sim-mu and
6i-&mu are not probable), we may perhaps conclude that, in
addition to the word mummu, "form, pattern," there existed
a word mummu, "chaos, confusion," and that consequently the
title Mummu was capable of two separate interpretations. I f such
be the case, it is possible that the application of the title to
Tiamat and her son was suggested by its ambiguity of meaning;
while Marduk (and also Ea) might have borne the name as the
"form" o r "idea" of order and system, Tiamat and her son
might have been conceived as representing the opposing " form "
or " idea" of chaos and confusion.

. .

THE N E W MATERIAL.

XXXIX

regarding the means to be adopted to restore the
old order of things. I t may be noted that the
text contains no direct statement that it was the
creation of light which caused the rebellion of the Hishatredof
"order," nut
primeval gods.' ApsE merely states his hatred of ,-ii,hl.,p
the a&tu or "way" of the gods, in consequence
of which he can get no rest by day or night; and,
from the fact that he makes use of the expressions
"by day" and "by night," it may be inferred that
day and night were vaguely conceived as already in
existence. It was therefore the substitution of order
in place of chaos which, according to the text of
the poem, roused ApsG's resentment and led to his
rebellion and d o ~ n f a l l . ~

'

Jensen's translation of what is 1. 50 of the First Tablet
represents Mummu as urging Apsfi to make the way of the gods
"like night," and implies that it was the creation of light which
caused the rebellion. L. 50, however, is parallel to 1. 38, and it is
certain that the adv. mu-%is to be rendered " b y night," and not
I' like night."
I n 1. 38 Apse complains that "by day'' he cannot
rest, and "by night" he cannot lie down in peace ; Mummu then
counsels him to destroy the way of the gods, adding in 1. 50,
" T h e n by day shalt thou have rest, by night shalt thou lie down
(in peace)" ; see pp. 8 ff. Jmsen's suggested rendering of im-ma
as-7%-nik-ma,in place of iv~-ma-a$-ru-nim-ma,
in Tabl. I, 1. log
and the parallel passages, is therefore also improbable.
a This fact does not preclude the interpretation of the fight
between Marduk and Tiamat as based upon a nature-myth,
representing the disappearance of mist and darkness before the
rays of the sun. For Marduk was originally a solar deity, and
Berossus himself mentions this interpretation of the legend (see
further, p. lxxxii, and the quotation on p. livf., notes z and I).

Our knowledge of the part played by Ea in the
overthrow of Apsii and Mummu is still fragmentary,
Mummuby Ea.
but we know from 1. 60 of the First Tablet that it was
he who detected the plot against the gods ; it is also
certain that the following twenty lines recorded the
fate of Apsn and his minister, and there are clear
indications that it was E a to whom their overthrow
was due. I n Tablet 11, 11. 53 ff., Anshar, on lcarning
from E a the news of Tiamat's preparations for battle,
contrasts the conquest of Mummu and Apst with the
task of opposing Tiamat, and the former achievement
he implies has been accomplished by Ea. It is clear,
therefore, that E a caused the overthrow of Apsnl and
the capture of Mummu,%but in what way he brought
it about, whether by actual fighting or by "his pure
incantation," is still a matter for conjecture. In view
of the fact that Anshar at first tried peaceful means
for overcoming Tiamat before exhorting Marduk to
wage battle against her, the latter supposition is the
more probable of the two. T h e subjugation of Apsn
by E a explains his subsequent disappearance from
the Creation story. When Apsii is next mentioned,
it is as "the Deep," and not as an active and
Tiamat's
malevolent deity.
detcrrnination
to avenge
After the overthrow of Apsn, Tiamat remained
ApsO and
M u m m u . d u e unconquered, and she continued to represent in her
the c'aptuie of

t o Kingu's
prompting.

-

Cf. Tilbl. 1, 1. 97.
Cf. Tabl. I, 1. 62.
Cf. Tabl. IV, I. rqz.

Cf. Tabl. 1 , 1. 98.
Cf. Tabl. 11, 11. 75 Ff.

THE NEW MATERIAL.

XLI

own person the unsubdued forces of chaos.' But,
as at first she had not herself begun the rebellion,
so now her continuation of the war against the
gods was due to the prompting of another deity.
T h e speech in which this deity urges Tiamat
to avenge ApsE and Mummu occurs in Tablet I,
11.93-104, and, inasmuch as she subsequently promoted
Kingu
. to be the leader of her forces " because he had
given her support," it may be concluded that it was
Kingu who now prompted her to avenge her former EL, contintxed
opposition LO
~ p o u s e . ~Ea, however, did not cease his active tile iorces of
disorder.
opposition to the forces of disorder, but continued
to play the chief r6le on the side of the gods. He
heard of Tiamat's preparations for battle, he carried
the news to Anshar, his father, and he was sent by
him against the monster. It was only after both he
and Anu had failed in their attempts to approach
and appease Tiamat that Anshar appealed to Mardulc
to become the champion of the gods.
e repetitions
Another point completely explained by the new TInhthe
I'irsf,
.
ecnnd.
aod
fragments of the text is the reason for the repetitions?rhird Tablets.
which occur in the first three tablets of the series.
It will be seen that Tablet I, 11. 109-142, are repeated
in Tablet 11, 11. 15-48 ; that Tablet 11, 11. 11-48, are

'

It is possible that the fragments of I. 88 f. of Tabl. I are not to
be taken as part of a speech, but as a description of Tiamat's state
of confusion and restlessness after learning of Apstl's fate.
a See also p. rq, n. I .
On the probable order of the attempts made by Ea and Anu
respectively to oppose Tiamat, sce Appendix 11, p. 188, n. I .

XLII

The repetitions
in the First,
Second, and
Third Tablets.

Bcrossus and
tile rnonstcr:
broodof
Tialllet.

INTRODUCTION.

repeated in Tablet I I I, 11. I 5-52 ; and that Tablet I I I,
11. I 5-66, are repeated in the same Tablet, 11. 73-1 2 4 .
The lines which are repeated have reference to
Tiamat's preparations for battle against the gods,
and to Anshar's summons of the gods in order that
they may confer power on Mardulc as their champion.
From the new fragments of the text we now know
that the lines relating to Tiamat's preparations occur
on the First Tablet in the form of narrative,
immediately after she had adopted Kingu's suggestion
that she should avenge the overthrow of ApsG and
Mummu ; and that in the Second Tablet they are
repeated by E a in his speech to Anshar, to whom
he carried the news. The context of the repetitions
in the Third Tablet is already known ; Anshar first
repeats the lines to his minister Gaga, when telling
him to go and summon the gods to a n assembly, and
later on in the Tablet Gaga repeats the message
word for word to Lahmu and Lahamu.
T h e constant repetition of these lines was doubtless
intended to emphasize the terrible nature of the
opposition which Marduk successfully overcame ; and
the fact that Berossus omits all mention of the part
played by E a in the earlier portions of the story is
also due to the tendency of the Babylonian priests
to exalt their local god at the expense of other deities.
T h e account which we have received from Berossus
of the Babylonian beliefs concerning the origin of the
universe is largely talien up with a description of

Part of the Seconil Tablet of ihe Creation Series (No. 40,559).

TIIE NEIV MATERIAL.

XLV

the mythical monsters which dwelt in the deep at
Ill? mooitora time when the world had not come into being and !>800dor
rllilll
lf.
when darkness and water alone existed.' Over these
monsters, according to Berossus, reigned a woman
named 'OPhp~a,who is to be identified with Tiamat,2

' T h e account of the Creation given by Berossus in his history
of Babylonia was summarized by Alexander Polyhistor, from whom
Eusebius quotes in the first book of his C h r o n i c o n ; the following
is his description of the mythical monsters which existed before
the creation of the world :-PeuioBa~ @?mi ~ p d v o vdv $ 7 ; w i u o x d ~ o ~
c&a ~ c i ) a ~ ; F ~ . o idro@utiv
l
72s ;B&LS
S L ~ I T ; ~ O "7P~ " Y ? 8 1 j l l ~ ~~
, "IOVP
82 xal ?e?paw?;pour h.al 8~wi)uodwovr. eal 0 5 p n p i u 2 x o v ~ a e:v, xe@aXLr
82 860, Eu8pel,'u 76 xal r ~ ~ a ~ ~ ~a a/6oia
~i l a 6;
~ Stoak,
,
J@cu =a2 BljXu'
xal t ~ i p a v rEvBpdraur ? a h p:v olV&u SKLX-?~ a xli p a w %ou~nr, ~ u j r8:
,is,,
se :T
,cp, :wwwv,
s: . Z ~ ~ , , O ~ ~ C V
EvOI,Awwv, a & iwworaura4pour ~ 7 j v;S&v F ~ W L L . Z W O ~ , O Y ~ B + J8;
~ I L~ a i
~ a 6 i ) o v r dv8pdwwv rt#aXAr G j l a u ~ o za2
~
xdvap r s r p a a w p & ~ o u r , o6ph.
iX860r i r T&V dwclreev pep&" i j l o u m ~ ,xal Ywwour xu,roas@&ou*
K,A
Lutlpdwaur, xai &cpa c&a x c @ a X 2 ~phv woi o d r a r a i'w71wu ; j ; o u w ~ , 06,,2,
6: EXB6wv. wal JAXa 6: @a wuv~a8awGv OqpIwv pop@is 2'Xov~u.
I I p ; r 6: T O ~ T O L F EXB6as xal ;i)ws?l xai ~ @ S L~P a JXXa
l
cGa ~ A L ; U Y I L
8 a u p a o i r a l wup7XXarlp;ua~ 729 ELF LXhljXwv ikilov~a' &u xul T ; ~ Y
slrdvar Qv 7- ?OF B;IXou uu- EvurrioOac, ; ; / l X e w 8: T O ~ T W Y ~ I ~ Y T W I ,
7 r ~ ~ ?j
~ iduopa
~ o ' O P d P ~ a t 2 v a ~ . TOZTO 82 X6XGaioil p i v ~<LXLX;LIO,
' E ~ X ~ V L O82
: ~ ~ C H F ~ ) ~ ~ Y FBrlXanoa
~ C T L L[ Lx a d 6: Irrdpl@ov aeX$uq].Eu'usedichmnico~umi i b e r p ~ i o r ed.
,
Schoene, col. 14 f.
T h e reading 'Opdpuu is an emendation for upupwrrr, cf. op. cit.,
col. 16, n. 6 ; while for 6 a X a ~ Bwe should probably read Hnpr;,
i e., the Babylonian T i m t u , "sea, ocean " = Tiamat, cf. RobertsonSmith, Zeits. fCr Assyr., vi, p. 3 3 % T h e name 'Opdlmrr may
x a l C8wp 'e?uo<, w n l dv

~ O ~ T O L P

ejl0"l" ~w'woll~v"ia8al. ;"8i)dwov~

zxw0,

..;,

.:

probably he identified with Ummu-Hubur, "the Mother-IJubur,"
a title of Tiamat which occurs in Tabl. I, 1. r 1 3 and the parallel
passages. T h e first part of the name gives the equation
O p = U m m u , but how Hubur has given rise to the transcription
o p x a is not clear. Jensen has attempted to explain the dilficulty

XLVI

Ornorka and
BEl.

INTRODUCTION.

while the creatures themselves represent the monsterbrood which Tiamat formed to aid her in her fight
against the gods.' Compared with the description of
the monsters, the summary from Berossus of the
incidents related on the Fourth Tablet is not very full ;
the text states that BGhor (i.e. Bel) slew 'OPc$xa,
~-

by suggesting that 'OpGpra= U m n z u - ~ h i ,and u l k i he talies as
a n Assyrian translation o f e u h u r . F o r ti;rhur he suggests t h e
meaning "that which is above, the North" (mainly from the
occnrrcnce o f F u - b u - r ~ =
r ~Su-bar-ium,
~
the Uppcr o r Northern
part of Mesopotamia, in 11 R, pl. 50, I. 51, cf. also V R, pl. 16.
1. 1 9 ) ; and, since what is in the North would have hecn regarded
by the Babylonians as "behind," t h e title @6ar might have been
rendered in Babylonian as urhu. This e x p l a n a t i o ~is~ ingenious,
but that t h e title e u b u r , as applied t o Tiamat, had t h e meaning
"that which is above, t h e North," cannot be regarded as proved
(cf. also Mythen, p. 5 6 4 ) Gunkel and Zimmern, on the othcr
hand, see in 'Opdpra t h e equivalent of t h e Aramaic words 'Om ' o r p ,
"Mother of the Deep," t h e existence of which they trace to the
prevalence of t h e Aramaic dialect in Babylonia a t the time of
Berossus (see SchZpfung und Chaos, p. 18 f., n. I ) ; according t o
this explanation the title 'OILdi,ra would he the Aramaic equivalent
of Ummu-&bur,
for @uhur may well have had the meaning
"deep, depth."
Thus, on t h e fragment S. 2,013 (sce below,
p. 196 f.) t h e meaning "depth," rather than " t h e North," is
suggested by t h e word ; in I. 9 of this fragment t h e phrase &-bar
pal-ha-ti, " t h e broad Bobur," is employed in antithesis to {anzE(r)
ru-&u-u-IL; " t h e distant heavens," precisely a s in t h e following
couplet Ti-amat tap-li-ti, " t h e Lower Ocean (Tiamat)," is opposed
t o Ti-amaf e-li-fi, " t h e Upper Ocean (Tiamat)." F o r a possible
connection between the lower waters of Tiamat and Huhur, thc River
of the Underworld, see below, p. Ixxxiii, n. z, and p. xcivf., n. 3 .

' According t o the poem, Tiamat is definitely stated t o have
created eleven kinds of monsters. T h e summary from Berossus
bears only a general resemhlancc t o the description of the monsters
in the poem.

TFIE NEW MATERIAL.

SLIX

and having cleft her in twain; from one half of her he
made the earth, and from the other the heavens,
while he overcame the creatures that were within her,
i.e. the monsters of the deep.'
T h e actual account of the creation of the world by Thecreationof
heaven and the
Marduli, as related in the Creation Series, begins iheavrnly
bodhes.
towards the end of the Fourth Tablet,' where the
narrative closely agrees with the summary from
Berossus. Marduk is there related to have split
Tiamat into halves, and to have used one half of her
as a covering for heaven. T h e text then goes on to
state that he founded heaven, which is termed E-shara,
a mansion like unto the Deep in structure, and that
he caused Anu, Bel, and Ea to inhabit their respective
districts therein. T h e Fifth Tablet does not begin
with the account of the creation of the earth, but
records the fixing of the constellations of the Zodiac,
the founding of the year, and Marduli's charge to the
Moon-god and the Sun-god, to the former of whom
he entrusted the night, his instructions relating to the
phases of the Moon, and the relative positions of
the Moon and the Sun during the month. T h e
new fragments of the Fifth Tablet contain some
interesting variants to this portion of the text,3 but,

' See below, p. livf., note I .

Cf. 11. 1 3 5 ff.
For instance, the fragment K. 1 3 , 7 7 4 (see below, pp. go 8.)
in I. 8, in place of " H e set the stations of BE1 and E a along with
him," reads ' I H e set the stations of Be1 and Anu along with him."
According to the text Marduk appoints Nihir (Jupiter), BE1 (tile
D

L

INTRODUCTION

with the exception of the last few lines of the text,
they throw no light on what the nlissing portions of
Thecreation of the Tablet contained.
In view, however, of the
the earth and
ofvegetation. statement of Berossus that from one half of Tiamat
Be1 formed the earth, we may conjecture that an
account of the creation of the earth occurred upon
some part of the Fifth Tablet. It is also probable
that the Fifth Tablet recorded the creation of
vegetation. That this formed the subject of some
portion of the poem is certain from the opening lines
of the Seventh Tablet,. where Marduk is hailed as
" Asari, ' Bestower of planting,' ' [Founder of sowing],'
' Creator of grain and plants,' ' who caused [the green
herb to spring up] ! ' " ; and the creation of plants and
herbs would naturally follow that of the earth.
Thecreation
From the new fragment of the Sixth Tablet,
of man.
No. 92,629, we know that this portion of the poem
related the story of the creation of man. As at the
north pole of the equator), and E a (probably a star in the extreme
south of the heavens) as guides to the stars, proving that they
were already thus employed in astronomical calculations. I n place
of Ea, K. 13,774 substitutes Anu, who, as the pole star of the
ecliptic, would be of equal, if not greater, importance in an astronomical sense. Another variant reading on K. 13,774 is the
substitution of hakkada-Tu, "his star," in place of ""Nannar-ru,
the Moon-god, in 1. 1 2 ; the context is broken, hut we cannot
doubt that iuk-nal mu-s'l; " a being of the night," in 1. 13 refers
to the Moon-god, and that Rlarduk entrusted the night to the
Moon-god according to this version also. Further variants occur
in I. 17 f. in the days enumerated in the course of l\.larduk's
address to the Moon-god ; see below, p. I ~ f.I

Part of the Fifth Tablet 01 the Creation Series (I<. 3,567 +I<. 8,588).

THE NEW MATERIAL.

LIII

beginning of his work of creation Marduk is said to ti^^
of man.
have "devised a cunning plan " ' while gazing upon
the dead body of Tiamat, so now, before proceeding
to man's creation, it is said that "his heart prompted
him and he devised [a cunning ~ l a n l . " ~In the
repetition of this phrase we may see an indication
of the importance which was ascribed to this portion
of the story, and it is probable that the creation of
man was regarded a s the culmination of Mardulr's
creative work. It is interesting to note, however,
that the creation of man is not related as a natural
sequel to the formation of the rest of the universe,
but forms the solution of a difficulty with which
Marduk has been met in the course of his work as
Creator. T o overcome this difficulty Marduk devised
the " cunning plan " already referred to ; the context
of this passage is not very clear, but the reason for
man's creation may be gathered from certain indications in the text.
W e learn from the beginning of the Sixth Tablet Thereasonof
m a n s creati011
that Marduk devised. his cunning plan after he had
"heard the word of the gods," and from this it is
clear that the Fifth Tablet ends with a speech of
the gods. Now in Tablet VI, 1. 8, Mardulr states
that he will create man "that the service of the gods
may be established " ; in 1. 9 f., however, he adds that

'

See Tabl. IV, 1. 136.
See Tahl. VI. 1. 2.

INTRODUCTION

LIV

~ h e r e a s o s o f he
mads creation.

will change the ways of the gods, and he appears
to threaten them with punishment. I t may be conjectured, therefore, that after Mardulc had completed
the creation of the world, the gods came to him and
complained that there were no shrines built in their
honour, nor was there anyone to worship them. T o
supply this need Marduk formed the device of creating
man, but at the same time he appears to have decided
to vent his wrath upon the gods because of their
discontent. I t is possible, however, that Ea dissuaded
Marduk from punishing the gods, though he no doubt
assisted him in carrying out the first part of his
proposal.'
Thenccount
In 11. 5 ff. of the Sixth Tablet Marduk indicates the
b y Bcrorsu~of
man'5crea'10n~ means he will employ for forming man, and this
portion of the text corroborates in a remarkable
manner the account given by Berossus of the method
employed by Bd for man's creation. The text of the
summary from Berossus, in the form in which it has
come down to us,' is not quite satisfactory, as the

' See below, p.

lviii.
After the description of the monsters of the deep referred to
above (see p. xlv), the summary from Berossus records the creation
by Be1 of the earth, and the heavens, and mankind, and aoimals,
as fo1iows:-0&wr
62 ~ i i u;Xwu ouvao~~~d7wv,
BwaveXOdvrr~ B,jXov
a

o x,~ c a~ ~J yV ~ ~ a i xpdn7u,
a
x n i ~ i pi"
)

~ ~ L C
( LUJ T ~?IOL?(TILL
E
~ Y Y , 7;)82
UXXOq p ~ r uO ~ ~ L I Y~; IaY~d
i, BY a6mj c&a i @ a v l c a r , dXX?lyop<xiir 8; @ ? i o ~
r o S i o ? I L @ V C C D X O ~ ? Jhyp&
CO~L.
a v ~ o r702 w a v r i ) ~x n i K d w u 2r a h +
n l ~ r ~ ~ ~~ O7~ 1? O7;)"
pY ~O ~C ~~dV@~~ X, e i "T$Y ; ~ V S U G~ t @ a X + v ua;
, ?i) ( i u 6 ~
aTpa ~ o h rJXhour Ocohs @upr20a< nj cyq, xal 8 ~ n w X d r TrO;~E ~ ~ Y O ~ ~ I I U U ~ ~
5
r
616 uospoAr V E B?V(LL x a l @ p ~ ~O a{k s cp ~ ~~ ; ~ XTi)"
~ 82
~ BijXou,
~ .
$V
%

THE NEW MATERIAL.

LV

course of the narrative is confused. T h e confusion Confusionin
the text.
is apparent in the repetition of the description of man's
creation and in the interruption of the naturalistic
explanation of the slaying of Omorlia. An ingenious
but simple emendation of the text, however, was
suggested by von Gutschmidt which removes both
these difficulties. T h e passage which interrupts
the naturalistic explanation, and apparently describes
a first creation of man, he regarded as having been
transposed; but if it is placed at the end of the
extract it falls naturally into place as a summary
by Eusebius of the preceding account of man's
creation which is said by Alexander Polyhistor to
have been given by Berossus in the First Boolc of
his History.' By adopting this emendation we obtain
Ala P s B e P ~ 7 u e & o ~ c ~ , 'TI~U~ ;O~' Y~T~iLiI) C K ~ T O FXwplsr~cc / j v

rai odllnr,iv
L?; dXXjXwv, wui Gcaidtmc ~ i ) vzdolrov. T L 6: cu3a 0th t'vsrwdv~a 74"
70; $w&r
Gduaptv $@ap?jvac, l6dura 62
BtXov Xdpav &?pov xnl
rapso$dpau KEXEGCL~L 7Gv BtGv 7 j u X E $ C L X ~~V@ L X ~ Yl Ta uL~ o G 7, i w ~ ~ ~ ; v ; aFPart.
v r ~ $vp;ua~ ~ I j vyijv zal G~uwXrloa~
duOpu3wour z r ~ lBvpla
~d 8uvdpeva .rAv dipa $ i p r ~ v . 'Awo.ishBau~ 62 r i u B j h a v x a l l r ~ p oxal
$XLOII X G ~( I E ~ ; / v ~ vT O ~ F~ 2 ~ T7 X6 ~ Y ~ T ~ TFa .G d @?<LY i) ?IOXU?CTIU~
'AXdfavSpos ;hiv B7pwco;v Bv wj wpAin @ d u ~ e ~ ~ . - E u s e b chron.
.
lib.

jri, ed. Sctioene, col.

16 f.
~ b the
r probable transposition of the
passage which occurs in the text after v ~ 7 e v v 7 p ~ u w u ,see the
following ,note.
The tdansposition of the passage suggested by von Gutschmidt
necessitates only one emendation of the text, viz. the reading of
r o ~ i i v s ein place of ~ o SE
v before B p o v . T h e context of this passage
would then read bn/poG c l i p dv7or 706 T ~ V T A B XU; C ~ W Vt'v ad,$

7 ~ r e ~ ~ ~T OpL G6 Yv~B?jXov,
E~, ~
SY A h p ~ B ~ p P 7 ~ e &p ;~ ~ co' ~r~~, p d v ~ a
7 6 oxdhos X o p l c a ~ y j v wa2 adl,i,aviv Lw' L X X ~ X W Y ,Y ( L ~ S L ~ T I 76"
~~L

INTRODUCTION.

LVI

a clear and consecutive account of how Uel, after the
creation of heaven and earth, perceived that the land
was desolate ; and how he ordered one of the gods to
cut off his (i.e. BEl's) head, and, by mixing the blood
which flowed forth with earth, to create men and
animals.
TheemployThis passage from Berossus has given rise to conmrnt of
Marduk's
siderable discussion, and more than one scholar has
blood for
mall'screation. attempted to explain away the beheading of Bel, the
Creator, that man might be formed from his blood.
Gunkel has suggested that in the original legend the
blood of Tiamat was used for this purpose ; ' S t u c k e i ~ , ~
followed by C h e ~ n e has
, ~ emended the text so that it
may suggest that the head of Tiamat, and not that
of Bel, was cut off; while Zimmern would take the
original meaning of the passage to be that the gocl
rdopov; and the summary by Eusebius, at the end of the extract,

would read Ta&&
Irphmj

q5Laxew'

$uiv
;vOphwour'

@yaw

ioG.rov

6

w o X u i h ~ w p'AXdfav8por

i o b r dXXovr ecobr 6ul,;oa~
61;

voepo6r

76"

Bliprucli;lu i v

711

Qebv ri$sXe?u ~ j u2au.iori x q h a X j v , xnl ;;I
re

S ~ V ~ xal
L

7.j

'

njq,

,

~ a l S ~ o ? r X c i m ~vebr

@ p o u j o ~ w r 0c:ar

pc~;X~tu;

cf. Schoene, op. cii., col. 16 f., note 9. T h e emendation has been
accepted by Budde, Die Biblische Urgeschichle, p. 477 f., by Jensen,
I<osmolngie, p. 29z, and by Gunkel and Zimmern, Sc.hii$jung und
Chaos, p. 1 9 f.
Cf. Schbpjung und Chaos, p. 2 0 f.
For Caviari in both passages Stucken would read a h , j ~;
cf. AstraInyihen der Nebrater, Bnlylnnier und Aegypter, i, p. 55.
Cheyne, who adopts Stucken's suggestion, remarks : " It
" stands to reason that the severed head spoken of in connectioii
" with the creation of man must he Tiamat's, not thai of the
" Creator" ; cf. E~zgclopiedrb
Biiiiic'~,i, col. 947, note.

TIIE NEW MATERIAL.

LVII

beheaded was not BE1, but the other deity whom he T h e employment of
addressed.' In 1. 5 of the Sixth Tablet, however, ~blood
arduk's
for
Marduk states that he will use his own blood for man'scrcation
creating man ; the text of this passage from Berossus
is thus shown to be correct, and it follows that the
account which he gave of the Babylonian beliefs
concerning man's creation does not require to be
emended or explained away.

' I n the Zeits. fc2r Asvr., xiv, p. 282, Zimmern remarks: " Somit
darf man wol doch nicht . . . annehmen, dass urspriinglich
" das Blut der Tiimat gemeint sei, allerdings auch nicht das Blut
" des Schopfergottes selbst, sondern das irgend eines Gottes
. ,
" der zu diesem Zwecke geschlachtet wird."
I n making this
suggestion Zimmern was influenced by the episode related in
col. iii of the fragmentary and badly preserved legend Bu. 91-5-9,
269 (cf. Cunez~ormT t x f s , pt. vi, and Mythen, p. 275, note), which
he pointed out contained a speech by a deity in which he gives
orders for another god to be slain that apparently a man may be
formed from his blood mixed with clay (cf. Z.A., xiv, p. 281).
The episode, however, has no connection with the first creation
of man, but probably relates to the creation of a man or hero to
perform some special exploit, in the same way as Uddrrshu-namir
was created by E a for the rescue of Ishtar from the Underworld,
and as Ea-bani was created by the goddess Aruru in the First
Tablet of the Gilgamesh-epic (cf. also Jensen's remarks in his
Myfhen und Epen, p, 275 f.). I learn from Professor Zimmern and
Professor Bezold that it was the tablet Bu. 91-5-9, 269, and not
an actual fragment of the Creation Series, to which Professor
Zimmern refers on p. 1 4 of his Blalische und ba6ylonische
Urgeschichfe. Although, as already stated, this fragment is not,
strictly speaking, part of a creation-legend, it illustrates the fact
that the use of the blood of a god for the creation of man was
fully in accordance with Babylonian beliefs.
See below, p. 86 f., n. 7.
"

.

. .

LVIII

INTRODUCTION.

Jensen has already suggested ' that the god whom
Be1 addressed was Ea, and the new fragment of. the
Sixth Tablet proves that this suggestion is correct.
In the Sixth Tablet Marduk recounts to E a his
intention of forming man, and tells him the means he
will employ. W e may therefore conclude that it
was E a who beheaded Marduk at his request, and,
according to his instructions, formed mankind from
his blood. E a may thus have performed the actual
work of making man, but he acted under Mardult's
directions, and it is clear from Tablet VII, 11. 29
and 32, that Marduk, and not Ea, was regarded as
man's Crea.tor.
he method of
According to Berossus, man was formed from the
m d s meation.
blood of BE1 mixed with earth. T h e new fragment
of the Sixth Tablet does not mention the mixing of
the blood with earth, but it is quite possible that this
detail was recounted in the subsequent narrative. On
the other hand, in the Babylonian poem Marduk
declares that, in addition to using his own blood, he
will create bone for forming man. Berossus makes
no mention of bone, but it is interesting- to note that
k i m t u , the Assyrian word here. used for " bone," is
doubtless the equivalent of the Hebrew word 'esem,

Ea's share in
man's creation.

' See Kosmolo~ie,p. 293.
T h e word is here met with for the first time, the reading of
the ideogram for "bone," not havingheen
known previously.

G I K - p A ~ - n u ( v a r . DA),

THE NEW MATERIAL.

LIX

bone," which occurs at the end of the narrative of
the.creation of woman in Gen. ii, 23.
T h e blood of BE1, according to Berossus, was ~ h e c r ~ z t i o n
of animals.
employed not only in man's creation but in that of
animals also, and it is possible that this represents the
form of the legend as it was preserved upon the Sixth
Tablet. Though, in that case, the creation of animals
would follow that of man, the opening lines of the
Sixth Tablet prove that man's creation was regarded
as the culmination of Marduk's creative work. T h e
"cunning plan," which Marduli devised in order to
furnish worshippers for the gods, concerned the
creation of man, and if that of animals followed it
must have been recorded as a subsidiary and less
important act.' In this connection it may be noted
that the expression T& ~ U U & , U E U C I rbv &;pa $ J ~ ~ E I V ,
which Berossus applies to the men and animals
created from the blood of Bel, was probably not based
on any description or episode in the Creation story as
' I

On p. zoo it is remarked that, until more of the text of the Fifth
and Sixth Tablets is recovered, it would be rash to assert that the
fragment K. 3,445 R. 396 (cf. Cun. Texfs, pt. xiii, pl. 24 f.)
cannot belong to the Creation Series. T h e phrase if-Run Pahkada
(Ohv., 1. 35) might perhaps refer to the head of Tiamat (cf. ru-juUS-fuda Ti-n[nzat], in 1. zq), which would not be inconsistent with
the fragment forming part of the Fifth Tablet as suggested on
p. 198. If the fragment were part of the Sixth Tablet, the kakhadu
in 1. 35 might possibly be Marduk's head (compare also i7z-~ur.-ma
in 1. 31 with lu-uk-surin Tahl. VI, 1. 5 ) . I n view, however, of the
inconsistencies noted on p. 199 f., it is preferable to exclude the
fragment at present from the Creation Series.

+

LX

INTRODUCTION

recorded on the Seven Tablets, but was suggested by
the naturalistic interpretation of the legend furnishecl
by Berossus himself.
Thesupposed
With reference to the creation of man, it was
instructions to
m a n a f t e r h i s suggested by George Smith that the tablet I<. 3,364
creation.
was a fragment of the Creation Series, and contained
the instructions given to man after his creation by
Marduk. This view has been provisioilally adopted
by other translators of the poem, but in Appendix I1 '
I have shown by means of a duplicate, No. 33,851,
that the suggestion must be given up. Apart from
other reasons there enumerated, it may be stated that
there would be no room upon the Sixth Tablet of
the Creation Series for such a long series of moral
precepts as is inscribed upon the tablets K. 3,364 and
No. 33,851. I t may be that Marduli, after creating
man, gave him some instructions with regard to the
worship of the gods and the building of shrines in
their honour, but the greater part of the text must
have' been talien up with other matter.
T hf e concluding
Sixth
~
h
~
i
~
~lines~ of the
~
~
~Tablet
~ are
~ partly
in the Creation
stoiy.
preserved, and they afford us a glimpse of the final
scene in the Creation story. As the gods had
previously been summoned to a solemil assembly that
they might confer power upon Marduk before he set
out to do battle on their behalf, so now, when he had
vanquished Tiamat and had finished his work of
See pp.

za i &

PLATEVI.

part bf the SeventhTablet ofthe Creatibn Series (Brit. Mu?., No. gr,139+93,07j).

THE NEW

MATERIAL.

LSIII

creation, they again gathered together in Upshuklti- Thefinalscene
in the Creation
naku, their council-chamber, and proceeded to magnify story.
him by every title of honour. W e thus obtain the
context or setting of the Seventh, and last, Tablet of
the Creation Series, the greater part of which consists
of the hymn of praise addressed by the gods to
Mardulr as the conqueror of Tiamat and the Creator
of the world.
T h e hymn of the gods takes up lines 1 - 1 2 4 of the T ~ ~ S C V C ~ ~ I ,
Tablet of the
Seventh Tablet, and consists of a series of addresses in creation
Series.
which Marduk is hailed by them under fifty titles of
honour. T h e titles are Sumerian, not Semitic, and
each is followed by one or more Assyrian phrases
descriptive of Marduk, which either explain the title
or are suggested by it. Of the fifty titles which the
hymn contained, the following list of eleven occur in
the first forty-seven lines of the text :The ~ i f t Titlea
y
Asari: *"Asa~-.-ri,
Tabl. VII, 1. I ; p. 92 f.
of Maiduk.
Asaru-alim : ""Asaru-a&, Tabl. VII, 1. 3 ; p. 92 f.
Asaru-alim-nuna : " ' A s a m - a h - n u n - n a , Tabl. VI I.,
1. 5 ; p. 92 f.
Tutu : " Tu-tu, Tabl. VII, 1. 9 ; p. 92 f.
Zi-ukkina : "Zi-ukhin-na, var. '"'Zi-ukkin, Tabl. VI I,
1. I 5 ; p 94 f.
Zi-azag : '&'Zi-azag,TTa. VII, 1. 19 ; p. gG f. ; var.
u"Na-zi-azag-g[a],p. I 6 I .
Aga-azag : "Aga-azag, Tabl. VII, 1. 25 ; p. 96 f.
Murazag : ""Mu(i.e. I ~ A+ LI)-azag, Tabl. VI I, 1. 33 ;
var. u'Mz(i.e. S ~ ~ ) - a zp,a ~173.
,

1,XIV

TheFiftyTitIes
of Murduli.

INTRODUCTION.

Shag-zu : '"'Sag-sw, Tabl. VI I, 1. 35 ; p. 98 f.
Zi-si : "Zi-si, Tabl. VI I, 1. 4 I ; p. loo f.
Sul--1cur: "SuJ-Kur, Tabl. VII, 1. 43 ; p. ~ o o f .
In the gap in the text of the Seventh Tablet,
between 11. 47 and 105, occur the following ten titles
of Marduli, which are talcen from the fragments
K. 13,761 and K. 8,519 (and its duplicate K. 13,337)
and from the commentary K. 4,406 :Agi[l . . . . ] : "A-gi[d- . . . . I , Tabl. VII
(K. 13,761); p. 102f.; var."'GiL[ 1, p. 163.
Zulummu : ""Zu-Z~~7z-nzzl,Tabl. V I I (K. 13,761) ;
p. 1 0 2 f.
Mummu : "'MzL-urn-mu, Tabl. V I I (K. 13,761);
p. 1 0 2 f.
Mulil : "'Mu-ZiZ, TTa. V I I (I<. 13,761); p. 1 0 2 f.
Gishlcul : "'GiS-kwd, Tabl. V I I ( K . 13,761) ; p. 1 0 2 f.
Lugal-ab[ . . . . ] : 'b'LzgaL-a6-[ . . . . 1, Tabl. VI I
(K. 13,761) ; p. 1 0 2 f.
Pap-[ . . . . ] : "Pa$-[. . . . 1, Tabl. VII
(K. 13,761); p. 102f.
Lugal - durmab : '*'Lugad - d u r - vzab, Tabl. V I I
(K. 8,5 19), and K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 8 ;
pp. roqf., 165.
Adu-nuna : ""A-du-rwn-na, Tabl. VII (K. 8,5 19)ancl
K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 23 ; pp. 104 f., 166.
Lugal-dul(or du)-azaga : '"'LwgaC-d81Z-azagsa, Tabl.
V I I ( K . 8,519); p. 106f.

THE RTEJ?' MATERIAL.

LXV

Four other titles, occurring in the concluding portion TheFiftyTltles
of Marduli.
of the text of the Seventh Tablet, are :Nibiru : 'b'Ni-6i-~u,var. [""INe-6i-ri, Tabl. VI I ,
1. 109; p. 108f.
Bel-m?itiiti : be-eZ mZtZti, var. '"'BB
mEtZti, Tabl.
VII, 1. I 16, p. I l o f. ; cf. also EN KUR-ICUR
(i.e. bZCmntati), p. 168.
E a : ""E-a, Tabl. VII, 1.

120;

p. 11of.

Vanslla : &a;SiiA AN, var. Nu-an-&-a, Tabl. VI I ,
1. 123, p. 110f. ; cf. alsoS'"ganiii,p. 178.
From the above lists it will be seen that the
recovered portions of the text of the Seventh.Tablet
furnish twenty-five out of the fifty names of Marduk.
From the list of the titles of Marduk preserved on
K. 2,107 + K. 6,086,' and from No. 54,228, a parallel
text to the Seventh Tablet,' seven other names may be
obtained, which were probably among those occurring
in the missing portion of the text ; these are :Lugal-en-ankia : "LugaZ-en-an-hi-a, K. 2,107, col. ii,
1. 1 9 ; p. 173.
Gugu : "'Gu-gu, K. 2,107, col. ii, 1.

22

; p. 173.

Mumu : ""Mu-mu, K . 2,107, col. ii, 1. 23 ; p. 173.
Dutu : "'Du-tu, K.

2 , I 07,

col. ii, 1. 24 ; p. I 73.

' See pp.

171

A.

See pp.

175

ff.
E

LXVI

INTRODUCTION.

Dudu : u''Du-du, K. 2,107, ~01.ii, 1. 25 ; p. 173.
Shag-gar(?): Sag-gsar, No. 54,228, Obv.,]. 13; p. 177.
En-bilulu : ' E n - - - No. 54,228, Obv., 1. 14 ;
p. 178.'
By these titles of honour the gods are represented
as conferring supreme power upon Mardulc, and the
climax is reached in 11. 1 1 6 ff. of the Seventh Tablet,
when the elder Be1 and Ea, Marduk's father, confer
their own names and power upon him. Marduk's
name of Hanshi, " Fifty," by which he is finally
addressed, in itself sums up and symbolizes his fifty
Theepilogue titles.
At the conclusion of these addresses there
to the Creation
Series.
follows an epilogue of eighteen lines, in which the
study of the poem is commended to mankind, and
prosperity is promised to those that rejoice in Marduk
and keep his works in remembrance.
The composite
The story of the Creation, in the form in which
natuve of the
Creationseries. it has come down to us upon tablets of the seventh
and later centuries before Christ, is of a distinctly

TheFiftyTitles
of Marduk.

' I n view of the fact that the Semitic name BZZ-maliTLioccurs as
one of Marduk's titles, it is not impossible that the title Biz-ilani,
which is applied to him in the Epilogue to the Seventh Tablet
(I. rzg, see p. r rz), also occurred as one of his fifty titles in the
body of the text. It is unlikely that the name Marduk itself was
included as one of the fifty titles, and in slipport of this view it
may be noted that the colophon to the commentary R. 366, etc.
(see p. 169), makes mention of "fifty-one names" of Marduk,
which may be most easily'explained by supposing that the scribe
reckoned in the name Marduk as an additional title.
See below, p. 169.

COMPOSITION OF THE POEM.

LXVII

composite character, and bears traces of a long process of editing and modification at the hands of the
Babylonian priests. Five principal strands may be
traced which have been combined to form the poem ;
these may be described as ( I ) T h e Birth of the gods ; Component
parts of the
( 2 ) T h e Legend of E a and Apsi ; (3) T h e Dragon- crcuion
Series.
Myth; (4) The actual account of Creation ; and ( 5 )
T h e Hymn to Marduk under his fifty titles. Since
the poem in its present form is a glorification ,of
Marduk as the champion of the gods and the Creator
of the world, it is natural that more prominence should
be given to episodes in which Marduk is the hero
than is assigned to other portions of the narrative in
which he plays no part. Thus the description of
Tiamat and her monster-brood, whom Marduli conquered, is repeated no less than four times,' and the
preparations of Marduli for battle and his actual fight
with the dragon take up the greater part of the Fourth
Tablet. On the other hand, the birth of the older
gods, among whom Marduk does not figure, is confined to the first twenty-one lines of the First Tablet ;
and not more than twenty lines are given to the Elementsin
account of the subjugation of Apsii by Ea. That t!6:z2ted
with Marduk.
these elements should have been incorporated at all
in the Babylonian version of the Creation story may
be explained by the fact that they serve to enhance
the position of prominence subsequently attained by

' See above, p. xli f.

LXVIII

The
Dragon-Myth.

INTRODUCTION.

Marduk. Thus the description of the birth of the
older gods and of the opposition they excited among
the forces of disorder, was necessarily included in
order to make it clear how Marduli was appointed
their champion ; and the account of Ea's success
against Apsii served to accentuate the terrible nature
of Tiamat, whom he was unable to withstand. From
the latter half of the Second Tablet onwards, Marduli
alone is the hero of the poem.
T h e central episode of the poem is the fight
between Marduk and Tiamat, and there is evidence
to Drove that this legend existed in other forms than
that under which it occurs in the Creation Series.
T h e conquest of the dragon was ascribed by the
Babylonian priests to their local god, and in the poem
the death of Tiamat is made a necessary preliminary
to the creation of the world. On a fragment of
a tablet from Ashur - bani -pal's library we possess,
however, part of a copy of a legend' which describes
the conquest of a dragon by some deity other than
M a r d ~ k . ~Moreover, the fight is there described as
taking place, not before creation, but at a time when
men existed and cities had been built. In this version

-

' See below,

pp.

116 ff.

Jensen makes Bel the slayer of the dragon in this legend
(cf. Mythen und Epen, p. 46), from which it might be argued that
Marduk is the hero in both versions of the story. But Jensen's
identification of the deity as Bel was due to a mistake of Delitzsch,
who published an inaccurate copy of the traces of the deity's name
upon the tablet; see below, p. 120, n. I.

COMPOSITION OF THE POEM.

LXIX

men and gods are described as equally terrified at the
dragon's appearance, and it was to deliver the land
from the monster that one of the gods went out and
slew him. This fragmentary tablet serves to prove
that the Dragon-Myth existed in more than one form
in Babylonian mythology, and it is not improbable
that. many of the great cities of Babylonia possessed
local versions of the legend in each of which the
city-god figured as the hero.'
In the Creation Series the creation of the world variant
accounts 01 the
is narrated as the result of Marduk's conquest of creatton.
the dragon, and there is no doubt that this version
of the story represents the belief most generally
held during the reigns of the later Assyrian and
Babylonian kings. W e possess, however, fragments
of other legends in which the creation of the world
is not connected with the death of a dragon. In one
of these, which is written both in Sumerian and
Babylonian,' the great Babylonian cities and temples
are described as coming into existence in consequence
of a movement in the waters which alone existed
before the creation of the world. Marduk in this

' The so-called "CuthaeanLegend of the Creation" (cf. pp. 14off.)
was at one time believed to represent another local verslon of the
Creation story, in which Nergal, the god of Cuthah, was supposed
to take the place of Marduk. But it has been pointed out by
Zimmern that the legend concerns the deeds of an Old-Babylonian
king of Cuthah, and is not a Creation legend; see below, p. 140 f.,
note r .
a See below, pp. I 30 ff.

LXX

i
t
accounts of the
creation.

INTRODUCTION.

version also figures as the Creator, for, together with
the goddess Aruru,' he created man by laying a reed
upon the face of the waters and forming dust which
he poured out beside it ; according to this version also
he is described as creating animals and vegetation.
In other legends which have come down to us, not
only is the story of Creation uncorlnected with the
Dragon-Myth, but Mardulc does not figure as the
Creator. In one of these "the gods" generally are
referred to as having created the heavens and the
earth and the cattle and beasts of the field ;' while
in another the creation of the Moon and the Sun is
ascribed to Anu, Bel, and E a 3
From the variant accounts of the story of Creation
and of the Dragon-Myth, which are referred to in the
preceding paragraphs, it will be clear that the priests
of Babylon made use of independent legends in the
composition of their great poem of Creation 4 ; by

'

Elsewhere this goddess figures in the rBle of creatress, for
from the First Tablet of the Gilgamesh-epic, col. ii, 11. 308., we
learn that she was credited with the creation of both Gilgamesh
and Ea-bani. Her method of creating Ea-bani hears some
resemblance to that employed in the creation of man according
to the Sumerian and Babylonian version above referred t o ; she
first washed her hands, and then, breaking o f a piece of clay,
she cast it upon the ground and thus created Ea-bani (cf. Jensen,
Myfhen und Epen, p. ~ z f.).
o
See below, p. 1 2 2 f.
See below, pp. I t q 8.
I n addition to the five principal strands which have been
described above as forming the frameworls of the Creation Series,

'

COMPOSITION OF THE POEM.

LXXI

assigning to Marduli the conquest of the Dragon' and
the creation of the world they justified his claim to the
chief place among the gods. As a fit ending to the
great poem they incorporated the hymn to Marduli,
consisting of addresses to him under his fifty titles. The hymn to
Mviduk under
s tltler.
This portion of the poem is proved by the Assyrian h ~ fifty
commentary, R. 366, e t ~ . as
, ~ well as by fragments of
parallel, but not duplicate, texts to have been an
independent composition which had at one time no
connection with the series Ensma eL2. In the poem
the hymn is placed in the mouth of the gods, who
at the end of the Creation have assembled together
in Upshukkinaku ; and to it is added the epilogue of
eighteen lines, which completes the Seventh Tablet of
the series.
it is possible to find traces of other less important traditions which
have been woven into the structure of the poem. Thus the
association of the god Kingu with Tiamat is probably due to the
incorporation of a separate legend with the Dragon-Myth.
I t may be here noted that the poem contains no direct
description of Tiamat, and it has been suggested that in it she
was conceived, not as a dragon, but as a woman. T h e evidence
from sculpture and from cylinder-seals, however, may he cited
against this suggestion, as well as several phrases in the poem
itself (cf. e.g., Tabl. IV, 11. 97 ff.). I t is true that in one of the
new fragments of the poem Tiamat is referred to as sinnijatu,
i.e. "woman" or "female " (cf. Tabl. 11, 1. I Z Z ) , hut the context
of this passage proves that the phrase is employed with reference
to her sex and not to her form.
8 Tahl. VII, 11. I-124.
See below, p. 169.
See below, pp. 175 ff.

'

LXXII

The date of
t h e Creation
legends.

Internal
evidence of

date.

INTRODUCTION.

In discussing the question as to the date of the
Creation legends, it is necessary to distinguish clearly
between the date at which the legends assumed the
form in which they have come down to us upon the
Seven Tablets of the series Enulna eZiS, and the
date which may be assigned to the legends themselves before they were incorporated in the poem.
Of the actual tablets inscribed with portions of the
text of the Creation Series we possess none which
dates from an earlier period than the seventh
century B.C. T h e tablets of this date were made
for the library of Ashur-bani-pal a t Nitleveh, but it is
obvious that the poem was not composed in Assyria
a t this time. T h e legends in the form in which we
possess them are not intended to glorify Ashur, the
national god of Assyria, but Marduk, the god of
Babylon, and it is clear that the scribes of Ashurbani-pal merely made copies for their master of
older tablets of Babylonian origin. T o what earlier
date we may assign the actual composition of the
poem and its arrangement upon the Seven Tablets,
is still a matter for conjecture; but it is possible to
offer a conjecture, with some degree of probability,
after an examination of the various indirect sources
of evidence we possess with regard to the age of
Babylonian legends in general, and of the Creation
legends in particular.
With regard to the internal evidence of date furnished by the Creation legends themselves, we may

DATE O F CREATION LEGENDS.

LXXIII

note that the variant forms of the Dragon-Myth and
of the account of the Creation, to which reference
has already been made, presuppose many centuries of
tradition during which the legends, though derived
probably from common originals, were handed down
independently of one another. During this period we
may suppose that the same story was related in
different cities in different ways, and that in course of
time variations crept in, with the result that two or
more forms of the same story were developed along
different lines. T h e process must have been gradual,
and the considerable differences which can be traced in
the resultant forms of the same legend may be cited as
evidence in favour of assigning an early date to the
original tradition from which they were derived.
Evidence as to the existence of the Creation legends Evidence from
~ u l p t u r cand
at least as early as the ninth century B.C. may be sfrom
cylinderdeduced from the representations of the fight between '*''
Marduli and the dragon Tiamat, which was found
sculptured upon two limestone slabs in the temple
of Ninib at Nimrnd.' T h e temple was built by Ashurnasir-pal, who reigned from B.C. 884 to B.C. 860, and
across the actual sculpture was inscribed the text of
a dedication to Ninib by this king. T h e slab therefore furnishes direct proof of the existence of the
legend more than two hundred years before the

' T h e slabs are preserved in the British Museum, Nimroud
Gallery, Nos. 28 and zg.

LXXIV

INTRODUCTION.

formation of Ashur-bani-pal's library. Moreover, the
fight between Marduk and Tiamat is frequently found
engraved upon cylinder-seals, and, although the
majority of such seals probably date from the later
Assyrian and Persian periods, the varied treatment of
the scene which they present points to the existence of
variant forms of the legend, and so indirectly furnishes
evidence of the early origin of the legend itself.
Evldencefro~n
From an examination of the Babylonian historical
hlstollcal
Inscnptiuns. inscriptions which record the setting up of statues
and the making of temple furniture, we are enabled
to trace back the existence of the Creation legends
to still earlier periods. For instance, in a text of
Agum,' a Babylonian king who reigned not later than
the seventeenth century B.c., we find descriptions of
the figures of a dragon and of other monsters which
he set up in the temple E-sagil at Babylon ; and in
this passage we may trace an unmistakable reference
to the legend of Tiamat and her monster-brood.
Agum also set up in the temple beside the dragon
a great basin, or laver, termed in the inscription
a tiimtu, or "sea."4 From the name of the laver,
and from its position beside the figure of the dragon,

' An Assyrian copy of this inscription, which was made for the
library of Ashur-bani-pal, is preserved in the British Museum, and
is numbered K. 4,149; the text is published in V R, pl. 3 3 .
Cf. col. iii, 1. 1 3 .
a Cf. COI. iv, 11. 5 0 ff.
Cf. col. iii, 1. 33.

DATE OF CREATION LEGEKDS.

LXXV

we may conclude that it was symbolical of the abyss Evidencefrom
historical
of water personified in the Creation legends by Tiamat inscriptions.
and Apsu. Moreover, in historical inscriptions of still
earlier periods we find allusions to similar vessels
termed a@;, i.e. " deeps " or " oceans," ' the presence
of which in the temples is probably to be traced to the
existence of the same traditions.
The three classes of evidence briefly summarized
above tend to show that the most important elements
in the Creation legends were not of late origin, but
must be traced back in some form or other to remote
periods, and may well date from the first half of the
third millennium B.c., or even earlier. I t remains to
consider to what date we may assign the actual
weaving together of these legends into the poem
termed by the Babylonians and Assyrians Enuma eZii".
Although, as has already been remarked, we do not ~ ~ i d
early copies of
possess any early copies of the text of the Creation .the,
legends :Series, this is not the case with other Babylonian
legends. Among the tablets found at Tell el-Amarna,
which date from the fifteenth century B.c., were fragments of copies of two Babylonian legends, the one Copier of
containing the story of Nergal and Ereshliigal,' andle~"dsabout
B.C. Iso0.

-

' Such

"deeps" were set up by Bur-Sin, King of Ur about
2500 (cf. I R, PI. 3, NO. xii, I ) , and by Ur-Nini, a still earlier
king of Shirpurla (cf. De Sarzec, Dicouverfes en Chnldie, pl. ii, No. I ,
col. iii, 1. 5 f.).
Two separate fragments of this legend vere found, of which
one is in the British Museum and the other, made up of four
B.C.

~

~

~

~

LXXVI

INTRODUCTION.

the other inscribed with a part of the legend of Adapa
and the South Wind.' Both these compositions, in
style and general arrangement, closely resemble the
legends known from late Assyrian copies, while of
the legend of Adapa an actual fragment, though not
a duplicate, exists in the library of Ashur-bani-pal.%
Fragments of legends have also been recently found
in Babylonia which date from the end of the period
( z ) c o ~ ~ ~ of
s o ~the First Dynasty of Babylon, about B.C. 2100,
legends about
B . c . ~ ~ M . and the resemblance which these documents bear to
certain legends previously known from Assyrian copies
only is not only of a general nature, but extends even
to identity of language. Thus one of the recovered
fragments is in part a duplicate of the so-called
" Cuthaean Legend of Creation " ; two others contain
phrases found upon the legend of E a and Atar-basis,
while upon one of them are traces of a new version

smaller fragments, is in Berlin. Their texts are published by
Budge and Bezold, The Ell el-Amarna Tahlefs, p. rqa f. and pl. r7
(Bu. 88-10-13, 69), and by Winckler and Abel, Der Thontafelfund
uon El-Amama, p. 164f. (Nos. 234, 236, 237, and 2 3 9 ) ; cf. also
Knudtzon, Beitrage zur Asyr., iv, pp. I 30 ff. For a translation of
the fragments, see Jensen, Myfhen und Epen, pp. 74ff.

- ' For the text, see Winckler and Abel, op. at., p. 166 a and 6 ,
and cf. Knudtzon, B.A., iv, pp. 128 ff. For translations, see
E. T. Harper, B.A., ii, pp. 420 ff., Zimmern in Gunkel's Schbpfung
und Chaos, pp. 420 ff., and Jensen, Mythen und Epen, pp. 9 4 ff.
a K. 8,214, published by Strong, P.S.B.A., xvi, p. 274 f. ; see
Jensen, Mythen und Epen, pp. 98 ff.
See below, p, 146 f., n. 4.

LXXVIII

-

Copie~of
legends before
BC.

INTRODUCTION.

and to the same period is to be assigned the fragment
of a legend which was published a few weeks ago by
Dr. Meissner,' and probably also the new fragment of
the Etana-myth, published last year by Father Scheil.'
These five fragments are of peculiar interest, for they
show that early Semitic, as opposed to Sumerian,
legends were in existence, and were carefully preserved and studied in other cities of Mesopotamia
carefully written (it may he noted that a na.has been omitted by
the scribe in No. 93,828, col. i, 1. 7), the lines vary considerably
in length, and the metre is not indicated by the arrangement of
the text. Though fragmentary the episodes described or referred
to in the texts are of considerable interest, perhaps the most
striking being the reference to the birth of Ishum in col. viii of
No. 87,521, and the damming of the Tigris with which the text
of No. 87,535 concludes. I intend elsewhere to publish translations
of the fragments.
' E2it altba~fouikhesFragment des Gilgamosepos, in the iMiLteilungtn
der Vorderasiatischen GescL~schaft, 1902, I .
T h e fragment here
published refers to episodes in the Gilgamesh-epic, the name of
Gilgamesh being written " " G I ~ , i.e. i z 8 ' ~ ~ S - ~ From
~ - ~ the
~ ~ .
photographic reproductions published by Dr. Meissner, it is clear
that the Gilgamesh fragment, in the nature of the clay employed,
and in the archaic forms of the characters, resembles the three
fragments in the British Museum. Unlike them, however, the
lines of its text do not appear to be separated by horizontal lines
ruled upon the clay.
Father Scheil has published the text in late Assyrian characters
in the Recueil dz trauaux, xkiii, pp. 18 ff., and he does not give
a photograph of the tablet. From his description ("C'ktait une
" belle grande tablette de terre cnite, avec, par face, trois ou quatre
"
colonnes . .
L'6criture en est archai'que et, sans aucun doute
" possible, antkrieure ri Hammurabi "), we may conclude that it
dates from the same period as the three tablets in the British
Museum described above.

-.

DATE OF CREATION LEGENDS.

LXXIX

than Babylon, and at a period before the rise of that
city to a position of importance under the kings of
the First Dynasty.
T h e evidence furnished by these recently discovered
tablets with regard to the date of Babylonian legends
in general may be applied to the date of the Creation
legends. While the origin of much of the Creation sumerian
origin of much
legends may be traced to Sumerian sources,' it is of the creation
legends.
clear that the Semitic inhabitants of Mesopotamia at
a very early period produced their own versions of
the compositions which they borrowed, modifying and
augmenting them to suit their own legends and beliefs.
The connection of Marduk with the Dragon-Myth,
and with the stories of the creation of the world and
See above, p. lxxv. Cf. also the Sumerian influence exhibited
by the names of the older pairs of deities Labmu and Labam",
Anshar and Kishar, as well as in the names of Icingu, Gaga,
etc.; while the ending is, employed as it constantly is in the
Creation Series with the force of a preposition, may probably
be traced to the Sumerian ku, later Ju, !i (cf. Jensen,
Kosrnologie, p. 266). T h e Assyrian commentaries to the Seventh
Tablet, moreover, prove the existence of a Sumerian version of
this composition, and as the hymn refers to incidents in the
Creation legends, the Sumerian origin of these, too, is implied.
The Sumerian version of the story of the Creation by Marduk and
Aruru (see below, pp. 130 ff.) cannot with certainty be cited as
evidence of its Sun~erianorigin, as from internal evidence it may
well be a later and artificial composition on Sumerian lines. That
we may expect,, however, one day to find the original Surnerian
versions of the Creation legends is not unreasonable ; with respect
to the recovery of the ancient religious literature of the Sumerians,
the remarkable series of early Sumerian religious texts published
in Cun. Texts, pt. xv, plates 7-30, may be regarded as an earnest
of what we may look for in the future.

LXXX

INTRODUCTION.

man, may with considerable probability be assigned to
Probabledate the subsequent period during which Babylon gradually
of the
t
o of attained to the position of the principal city in MesoMarduk with
the Creation
~otamia. On tablets inscribed during the reigns of
legends.
kings of the First Dynasty we may therefore expect
to find copies of the Creation legends corresponding
closely with the text of the series Enuma elis". I t is
possible that the division of the poem into seven
sections, inscribed upon separate tablets, took place
Probabledate at a later period ; but, be this as it may, we may
::%orition
of conclude with a considerable degree of confidence that
the poem
Enumadii:
the bulk of the poem, as we know it from late Assyrian
and Neo-Babylonian copies, was composed at a period
not later than B.C. 2000.
The political influence which the Babylonians
exerted over neighbouring nations during long periods
of their history was considerable, and it is not surprising that their beliefs concerning the origin of the
universe should have been partially adopted by the
That BabyI ~ R ~races
~ with
~ ~ whom
~ ~ they
~ ~came
I , in ~ contact.
Babylonian
Creation
lonian elements may be traced in the Phoenician
legends.
cosmogony has long been admitted, but the imperfect,
and probably distorted, form in which the latter has
come down to us renders uncertain any comparison
of details.' Some of the beliefs concerning the

' For the account of the Phoenician cosmogony according to
Sanchuniathon, see Eusebius, Praep. en., i, g f., who quotes from
the Greek translation of Philo Byblius ; the accounts of Eudemus
and Machus are described by Damascius, cap. 125 (ed. Iiopp,

I N F L U E N C E O F CREATION LEGENDS.

LXXXI

creation of the world which were current among the
Egyptians hear a more striking resemblance to the
corresponding legends of Babylonia. Whether this
resemblance was due to the proto-Semitic strain which
probably existed in the ancient Egyptian race,' or is
to be explained as the result of later Babylonian
influence from without, is yet uncertain. But, whatever
explanation be adopted, it is clear that the conception
of chaos as a watery mass out of which came forth
successive generations of primeval gods is common
to both races.' It is in Hebrew literature, however,
that the most striking examples of the influence of the
Babylonian Creation legends are to be found.
Points of
T h e close relation existing between the Babylonian r ~ i c m b l l n c c
hati%,ecothe
account of the Creation and the narrative in Genesis creation
Iegenris and
i, I - ii, 4a has been recognized from the time of the GC". i. I ", 4Q :-

p. 385). F o r summaries and comparisons of these cosmogonies,
see Lukas, Die Grundbegrzfe in den i~ososmogoniinder alien ViiNle~;
PP. '39 ff.
Cf. Budge, History ofEgypt, vol. i, pp. 39 ff.
a Other Egyptian beliefs, acconling t o which the god Shu
separated heaven and earth and upheld the one above the other,
may be compared t o t h e Babylonian conception of t h e making
of heaven and earth by t h e separation of the two halves of Tiamat's
body. For detailed descriptions o f t h e Egyptian cosmogonies,
see Brugsch, RelQion und MythoZng<e der alten Aegypfer, pp. roo ff. ;
and for a convenient summary of the principal systems, see 1,ukas.
op. cit., pp. 47 ff. Though the Babylonian and Egyptian cosmogonies,
in some of their general features, resemble one another, the detailed
romparisons of the names of deities, etc., which Hommel attempts
in his Ba6ylonirche Ursp~ungder 8gj.plischen Z<ulfuul; are rather
fanciful.
F

LXXXII

INTRODUCTION.

first discovery of the former,' and the old and
new points of resemblance between them may here
be
briefly discussed. According to each account the
(1) The.
descnpt~onof
chaos.
existence of a watery chaos preceded the creation of
the universe ; and the Hebrew word teham, translated
"the deep" in Gen. i, 2, is the equivalent of the
Babylonian Tiamat, the monster of the deep personifying chaos and confusion. In the details of the
Creation there is also a close resemblance between
(1)Thecreation the two accounts.
In the Hebrew narrative the first
of light.
act of creation is that of light (Gen. i, 3 - 5 ) and it
has been suggested that a parallel possibly existed
in the Babylonian account, in that the creation of
light may have been the cause of the revolt of
Tiamat. From the new fragments of the poem we
now know that the rebellion of the forces of disorder,
which was incited by Apsii and not Tiamat, was
sue, not to the creation of light, but to his hatred
of the way of the gods which produced order in
place of chaos.= A parallelism may still be found,
however; in the original form of the Babylonian myth,
according to which the conqueror of the dragon was
undoubtedly a solar deity.3 Moreover, as has been
pointed out above,4 day and night are vaguely conceived in the poem as already in existence at the

' See above, p. xxvi f.
See above, p. xxxix, and below, p, lo, n.
See above, p. xxxix, n. z.
See above, p. xxxix.

I

HEBREW PARALLELS.

LXXXIII

time of Apsii's revolt, so that the belief in the
existence of light before the creation of the heavenly
bodies is a common feature of the Hebrew and the
Babylonian account.
T h e second act of creation in the Hebrew narrative (3)Thecreation
of a firmament.
is that of a firmament which divided the waters that
were under the firmament from the waters that were
above the firmament (Gen. i, 6-8). I n the Babylonian
poem the body of Tiamat is divided by Marduli, and
from one-half of her he formed a covering or dome
for heaven, i.e. a firmament, which kept her upper
waters in place. Moreover, on the fragment S. 2,013
we find mention of a Ti-amat e-Zi-ti and a Ti-nmat
+-&ti, that is, an Upper Tiamat (or Ocean) and
a Lower Tiamat (or Ocean), which are the exact
equivalents of the waters above and under the
firmament.'

'

' See below, p.
' According to

196 f.

Babylonian belief the upper waters of Tiamat
formed the heavenly ocean above the covering of heaven; but
it is not clear what became of her lower waters. It is possible
that they were vaguely identified with those of A p s ~ ,and were
believed to mingle with his around and beneath the earth. I t
may be suggested, however, that perhaps all or part of them were
identified with Hnbur, the River of the Underworld which was
believed to exist in the depths of the earth (cf. Jensen, Myihen,
p. 307). The fact that Tiamat bore the title Umrnu-Ejubur, "the
Mother Hubur," may be cited in support of this suggestion, as
well as the occurrence upon S. 2 , 0 1 3 (cf. p. 197) of the plirases
$amZ(e) ru-ku-u-li and Uu-hur pal-ka-if, corresponding to Ti'amat
L-li-fiand Ti.amat iap-li-h' respectively; see also p. xlvi, note.

LXXXIV

(4)The creation
o,,,,,,,,d

of vegetation.

INTRODUCTION.

The third and fourth acts of creation, as narrated in
Gen. i, 9 - 13, are those of the earth and of vegetation.
Although no portion of the Babylonian poem has
yet been recoveredwhich contains the corresponding
account, it is probable that these acts of creation were
related on the Fifth Tablet of the series.' Berossus
expressly states that Be1 formed the earth out of one
half of Omorlta's body, and as his summary of the
Babylonian Creation story is proved to be correct
wherever it can be controlled, it is legitimate to
assume that he is correct in this detail also. Moreover, in three passages in the Seventh Tablet the
creation of the earth by Marduk is referred to : 1. I I 5
reads, " Since he created the heaven and fashioned
the firm earth" ; the new fragment K. I 2,830 (restored
from the commentary K. 8,299) states, " He named
the four quarters (of the world) " ; and another new
fragment; K. 13,761 (restored from the co~nmentary
K. 4,406), definitely ascribes to Marduk the title
"Creator of the earth."
That the creation of vegetation by Marduk was also recorded in the poem may
be concluded from the opening lines of the Seventh
Tablet, which are inscribed on the new fragment
K. 2,854, and (with restorations from the commentary
S. 1 1 , etc.) ascribe to him the titles " Bestower of

' See above, p. 1.
Ste below, p. 109.
See below, p. lor.
See below, p. 103.

HEBREW PARALLELS.

LXXXV

planting," " Founder of sowing," "Creator of grain
and plants," and add that he "caused the green herb
to spring up." '
T o the fifth act of creation, that of the heavenly (5)Theereation
of the heavenly
bodies (Gen. i, 14- ~ g ) we
,
find an exceedingly close bodies.
parallel in the opening lines of the Fifth Tablet of the
series.= I n the Hebrew account, lights were created
in thefirmament of heaven to divide the day from the
night, and to be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days, and years. In the Babylonian poem also the
stars were created and the year was ordained at the
same time ; the twelve months were to be regulated
by the stars ; and the Moon-god was appointed " to
determine the days." As according to the Hebrew
account two great lights were created in the firmament
of heaven, the
light to rule the day and the
lesser to rule the night, so according to the Babylonian
poem the night was entrusted to the Moon-god, and
the Moon-god's relations to the Sun-god are described
in detail. On the Seventh Tablet, also, the creation
of heaven and the heavenly bodies is referred t o ; in
1. 16 Marduk is stated "to have established for the
gods the bright heavens," and 1. I I I f. read, " For
the stars of heaven he upheld the paths, he shepherded
all the gods like sheep !"

'

See above, p. 1, and below, p. 93
See below, pp. 78 ff.
See below, p. 95.
See below, p. 109.

LXXXVI

(6)Thecreation
of animals.

INTRODUCTION.

TO the sixth and seventh acts of creation, i.e.,
the creation of creatures of the sea and winged
fowl, and of beasts and cattle and creeping things
(Gen. i, 20-zs), the Babylonian poem as yet offers
no parallel, for the portion of the text which refers
to the creation of animals is still wanting. But since
Berossus states that animals were created at the
same time as man, it is probable that their creation
was recorded in a missing portion either of the Fifth
or of the Sixth Tablet. If the account was on the
lines suggested by Berossus, and animals shared in
the blood of Bd, it is clear that their creation was
narrated, as a subsidiary and less important episode,
after that of man.' But, although this episode is still
wanting in the poem, we find references on other
Assyrian Creation fragments to the creation of beasts.
Thus, for the creation of the creatures of the sea in
Genesis, we may compare the fragmentary text
K. 3445 + R. 396, which records the creation of
nu&+,
" dolphins (?)."
And for the creation of
beasts of the earth and cattle, we may compare the
tablet D.T. 4 1 , ~which, after referring generally to
the creation of "living creatures" by "the gods,"
proceeds to classify them as the cattle and beasts of
the field, and the creatures of the city, the two

' See above, p. lix.
See above, p. lix, n.
See below, p. I zz f.

I,

and below, p. 198.

HEBREW PARALLELS.

LXXXVII

classes referring respectively to wild and domesticated
animals.'
T h e account of the creation of man, which is $ ; f , k y t l a n
recorded as the eighth and last act of creation in
the Hebrew account (Gen. i, 26-31), at length finds
its parallel in the Babylonian poem upon the new
fragment of the Sixth Tablet, No. 92,629.' I t has
already been pointed out that the Babylonian account
closely follows the version of the story handed down
to us from Berossus,%nd it may here be added that
the employment by Marduk, the Creator, of his own
blood in the creation of man may perhaps be compared to the Hebrew account of the creation of man
in the image and after the likeness of E l ~ h i m . ~
Moreover, the use of the plural in the phrase " Let
us make man" in Gen. i, 26, may be compared with
the Babylonian narrative which relates that Marduk
imparted his purpose of forming man to his father Ea,

' The portion of the text on which this reference to the creation
of beasts is inscribed forms an introduction to what is probably
an incantation, and may be compared to the Creation legend of
Marduk and Aruru which is employed as an introduction to an
incantation to be recited in honour of the temple E-zida (see
below, p. 13of., n. I ) . T h e account given of the creation of the
beasts is merely incidental, and is introduced to indicate the period
of the creation by Nin-igi-azag of two small creatures, one white
and one black, which were probably again referred to in the following
section of the text.
See above, pp. liv if.
See below, pp. 86 ff.
See also below, p. xciii. It may be also noted that, according
to Babylonian belief, the great gods (cf. the plural of Elohim) were
always pictured in human form.

LXXXVIII

INTRODUCTION.

whom he probably afterwards instructed to carry out
the actual work of man's creation.'
(8) The
A parallel to the charge which, according to the
i n s f r ~ ~ t i ot o" ~
m a n a f t e r h i s Hebrew account, Elohim gave to man and woman
creation.
after their creation, has hitherto been believed to exist
on the tablet K. 3,364, which was supposed to contain
a list of the duties of man as delivered to him after his
creation by Marduk. T h e new Babylonian duplicate
of this text, No. 33,851, proves that K. 3,364 is not
part of the Creation Series, but is merely a tablet of
moral precepts, so that its suggested resemblance to
the Hebrew narrative must be given up. It is not
improbable, however, that a missing portion of the
Sixth Tablet did contain a short series of instructions
by Marduk to man, since man was created with the
special object of supplying the gods with worshippers
and building shrines in their honour. That to these
instructions to worship the gods was added the gift of
dominion over beasts, birds, and vegetation is possible,
but it must be pointed out that the Babylonian version
of man's creation is related from the point of view
of the gods, not from that of man. Although his
creation forms the culmination of Marduk's work, it
was conceived, not as an end and aim in itself, but
merely as an expedient to satisfy the discontented
gods.= This expedient is referred to in the Seventh

' See above, p.

Iviii.

' See above, p. liii f., and below, p. 85, note 3 , and p. 88 f., notes
I

and 3.

HEBREW PARALLELS.

LXXXIX

Tablet, 1. zg, in the phrase " For their forgiveness
(i.e., the forgiveness of the gods) did he create
mankind," and other passages in the Seventh Tablet
tend to show that Mardulr's mercy and goodness are
extolled in his relations, not to mankind, but to the
gods.' In one passage' man's creation is referred to,
but it is in connection with the charge that he forget
not the deeds of his Creator.'
The above considerations render it unlikely that the ( ~ I T I ) ~
domitlion of
Babylonian poem contained an exact parallel to the creation.
manover
exalted charge of Elohim in which H e placed the
rest of creation under man's dominion.
It is
possible, however, that upon the new fragment of
the Seventh Tablet, K. 12,830 (restored from the
, ~ have a reference to the
commentary K. 8 , ~ 9 9 )we
superiority of man over animals, in the phrase
" mankind [he created], [and upon] him understanding
; and if this be so, we may
[he bestowed (?) . .
compare it to Gen. i, 286. Moreover, if my suggested restoration of the last word in 1. 7 of the
Sixth Tablet be correct, so that it may read " I will
create man who shall inhabit [the earth],4" we may

.I"
-

See especially, 11. 7 f., g ff., 15 ff., z j , and 27 f.
L. 3 1 f., which read, "May his (i.e. hlarduk's) deeds endure,
may they never be forgotten in the mouth of mankind whom his
hands have made ! "
See below, p. loo f.
See below, p. 8 7 ; the acconnt of Berossus is in favour of
this restoration.

XC

INTRODUCTION.

compare it to Gen. i, 28a, in which man is commanded
to be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.'
('.)Theword
A suggestion has been made that the prominence
of the Creator.
given to the word of the Creator in the Hebrew
account may have found its parallel in the creation by
a word in the Babylonian poem. It is true that the
word of Marduk had magical power and could destroy
and create alike; but Marduk did not employ his
word in any of his acts of creation which are at present
known to us. H e first conceived a cunning device,
and then proceeded to carry it out by hand. T h e
only occasion on which he did employ his word to
destroy and to create is in the Fourth Tablet, 11. 19-26,2
when, at the invitation of the gods, he tested his power
by making a garment disappear and then appear again
at the word of his mouth. The parallelism between
the two accounts under this heading is not very close.
The order of the separate acts of creation is also not
(XI) TI,^ order
of Creation.
quite the same in the two accounts, for, while in the
Babylonian poem the heavenly bodies are created
immediately after the formation of the firmament, in
the Hebrew account their creation is postponed until
after the earth and vegetation have been made. It is
~ossiblethat the creation of the earth and plants has
been displaced by the writer to whom the present
form of the Hebrew account is due, and that the
T h e new parallel to Gen. ii, z j , furnished by 1. 5 of the Sixth
Tablet, is referred to below, p. xciv.
a See below, p. 60 f.

HEBREW PARALLELS.

XCI

order of creation was precisely the same in the original
forms of the two narratives. But even according to the
present arrangement of the Hebrew account, there
are several striking points of resemblance to the
Babylonian poem. These may be seen in the existence
of light before the creation of the heavenly bodies ;
in the dividing of the waters of the primeval flood by
means of a firmament also before the creation of the
heavenly bodies ; and in the culminating act of creation
being that of man.
It would be tempting to trace the framework of the (Days
12) The Seven
and the
Seven Days of Creation, upon which the narrative Seven
Tablets
of Crzatlon.
in Genesis is stretched, to the influence of the Seven
Tablets of Creation, of which we now know that the
great Creation Series was composed. The reasons for
the employment of the Seven Days in the Hebrew
account are, however, not the same which led to the
arrangement of the Babylonian poem upon Seven
Tablets. In the one the writer's intention is to give the
original authority for the observance of the Sabbath; in
the other there appears to have been no special reason
for this arrangement of the poem beyond the mystical
nature of the number "seven." Moreover, acts of
creation are recorded on all of the first six Days in the
Hebrew narrative, while in the Babylonian poem the
creation only begins at the end of the Fourth Tablet.'
The resemblance, therefore, is somewhat superficial, but

' There

is, however, a parallel between the Seventh Day on

XCII

The Seven
Days and the
Seven Tablets
of Creation.

INTRODUCTION.

it is possible that the employment of the number "seven"
in the two accounts was not fortuitous. Whether the
Sabbath was of Babylonian origin (as seems probable)
or not, it is clear that the writer of the narrative in
Genesis was keenly interested in its propagation and
its due observance. Now in Exilic and post-Exilic times
the account of the Creation most prevalent in Babylonia
was that in the poem E n u m a edir, the text of which
was at this time absolutely fixed and its arrangement
upon Seven Tablets invariable. That the late revival
of mythology among the Jews was partly due to their
actual study of the Babylonian legends at this period is
sufficiently proved by the minute points of resemblance
between the accounts of the Deluge in Genesis and
in the poem of Gilgamesh.' It is probable, therefore,
that the writer who was responsible for the final
form of Gen. i - ii, 4a, was familiar with the Babylonian
legend of Creation in the form in which it has come
down to us. The supposition, then, is perhaps not too
which Elohim rested from all H i s work, and the Sevenlh Tablet
which records t h e hymns of praise sung by the gods to Mardulr
after his work of creation was ended.
' See my Ba6ylonian Religion nndMylhology, pp. 138 ff. T h e fact
that the Jews of theExile were probably familiar with the later forms
of Babylonian legends explains some of the close resemblances
in detail between the Babylonian and Hebrew versions of the same
story. But this is in perfect accordance with the borrowing of
that very story by t h e Hebrews many centuries before; indeed, t o
t h e previous existence of ancient Hebrew versions of Babylonian
legends may be traced much of the impetus given to the revival
of mythology among the exiled Jews.

HEBREW PARALLELS.

XCIII

fanciful, that the connection of the Sabbath with the
story of Creation was suggested by the mystical
number of the Tablets upon which the Babylonian
poem was inscribed.
pointe of
Further resemblances to the Babylonian Creation resemblance
legends may be traced in the second Hebrewgb";lzian
account of the Creation which follows the first ink:,Fg,":k
of tile
According to this version man was account
Gen. ii, 46-7.
Creation.
formed from the dust of the ground, which may be
compared to the mixing of Bel's blood with earth
according to the account of Berossus, the use of the
Creator's blood in the one account being paralleled by
the employment of His breath in the other for the
purpose of giving life to the dust or earth. Earth is
not mentioned in the recovered portion of the Sixth
Tablet, but its use in the creation of men is fully in
accordance with Babylonian beliefs. Thus, according
to the second Babylonian account of the Creation,'
Marduk formed man by pouring out dust beside a
reed which he had set upon the face of the waters.
Clay is also related to have been employed in the
creation of special men and heroes ; thus it was used
in Ea-bani's creation by Arurq2 and it is related to
have been mixed with divine blood for a similar
purpose in the fragmentary legend Bu. 91-5-9, ~ 6 9 . ~
ToF the account of the creation of woman in
Gen. ii, 18 ff. we find a new parallel in 1. 5 of the

' See below, pp.

See above, p. lxx, n.
See above, p. lvii, n. I .

130ff.

I.

XCIV

Paradiseand
the River of
creation.

'

INTRODUCTION.

Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series, in the use of
the word igimtu, bone," corresponding to the
Hebrew '@!ern which occurs in the phrase "bone of
my bones" in Gen. ii, 23.
In addition to the Babylonian colouring of much
of the story of Paradise we may now add a new
parallel from the Babylonian address to a mythical
River of Creation, inscribed on S. 1704 and the NeoBabylonian Tablet 82 - 9 - 18, 5311.l This short
composition is addressed to a River to whom the
creation of all things is ascribed,%and with this river
we may compare the mythical river of Paradise
which watered the garden, and on leaving it was
divided into four branches. That the Hebrew River
of Paradise is Babylonian in character is clear ; and
the origin of the Babylonian River of Creation is
also to be found in the Euphrates, from whose waters
southern Babylonia derived its great f e r t i l i t ~ . ~T h e

' See below, p.

1 2 8 f.
With the Babylonian River of Creation, suggested by the
Euphrates, we may compare the Egyptian beliefs concerning H i p
or Hipi, the god of the Nile, who became identified with most
of the great primeval Creation gods and was declared to he the
Creator of all things. Considering the importance of the Nile
for Egypt, it is easy to understand how he came to attain this
position. Brugsch sums up his account of this deity in the words :
" So ist der Nilgott im letzten Grunde der geheimnissvolle Urheher
" aller Wohlthaten, welche dievon ihm befruchtete agyptische Erde
" den Gottern und Menschen zu hieten vermag, er ist 'der starke
" Schopfer von allem ' " ; see Relkion und Myihologie der alien
Aegypter, p. 641.
It is possihle that this River, though suggested by the

DATES OF BABYLONIAN INFLUENCE.

XCV

life-giving stream of Paradise is met with elsewhere
in the Old Testament, as, for instance, in Ezekiel
xlvii, and it is probable that we may trace its
influence in the Apocalypse.'
I t is unnecessary here to discuss in detail the p r o b a ~ e d a t e s
of Rnbylonlrn
evidence to prove that the Hebrew narratives of the lnAuence on
Hebrew
Creation were ultimately derived from Babylonia, and myt~lo~ogy.
were not inherited independently by the Babylonians
and Hebrews from a common Semitic ancestor.' For
the local Babylonian colouring of the stories, and
the great age to which their existence can be traced,
extending back to the time of the Sumerian inhabitants
are conclusive evidence against the
of Mes~potamia,~
second alternative. On the other hand, it is equally
unnecessary to cite the well-known arguments to prove
Euphrates, is to be identified with Hudur, the River of the Underworld, to whom an incantation in the terms of the one under
discussion might well have been addressed. A connection
between Tiamat and the river Fubur has been suggested above
(cf. p. Ixxxiii, n. z), and, should this prove to be correct, we might
see in the phrase banat(at) ha-la-nia, applied to the River, a parallel
to pa-ti-ka-a/ ka-la-ma, the description of Ummu-Hubur (Tiamat)
in Tablet I, 1. I r 3 aad the parallel passages.
' The connection which Gunkel and Zimmern would trace
between the River of Paradise and the River of Water of Life in
the Apocalypse on the one side and the " water of life," mentioned
in the legend of Adapa, on the other, cannot he regarded as
proved. The resemblance in the expressions may well be
fortuitous, since there are few other points of resemblance between
the narratives in which the expressions occur.
On these subjects, see my Bad. Rel. and Myth., pp. 108 ff.
See above, pp. lxxv and lxxix.

XCVI

Probable dates
of Babylonian
Influenceon

Hebrew

INTRODUCTION.

the existence among the Hebrews of Creation legends
similar to those of Babylonia for centuries before the
Exile. T h e allusions to variant Hebrew forms of the
Babylonian Dragon-Myth in Amos ix, 3, Isaiah li, 9,
Psalm Ixxiv, 13 f., and lxxxix, 9 f., and Job xxvi, I 2 f.,
and ix, 13, may be cited as sufficient proof of the early
period at which the borrowing from Babylonian sources
must have taken place ; .and the striking differences
between the Biblical and the linown Babyloniall versions
of the legends prove that the Exilic and post-Exilic Jews
must have found ready to their hand ancient Hebrew
versions of the stories, and that the changes they
introduced must in the main have been confined to
details of arrangement and to omissions necessitated by
their own more spiritual conceptions and beliefs. T h e
discovery of the Tell el-Amarna tablets proved conclusively that Babylonian influence extended throughout Egypt and Western Asia in the fifteenth century
B.c., and the existence of legends among the letters
demonstrated the fact that Babylonian niythology
exerted an influence coextensive with the range of
her political ties and interests. W e may therefore conjecture that Babylonian myths had become naturalized
in Palestine before the conquest of that country by
the Israelites. Many such Palestinian versions of
Babylonian myths the Israelites no doubt absorbed;
while during the subsequent period of the Hebrew liings
Assyria and Babylonia exerted a direct influence upon
them. It is clear, therefore, that at the time of their

AUTIIORITLES FOR TEXT.

SCVII

exile the captive Jews did not find in Babylonian
mythology an entirely new and unfamiliar subject,
but recognized in it a series of kindred beliefs, differing
much from their own in spiritual conceptions, hut
presenting a startling resemblance oil many material
points.
Now that the principal problems with regard to thc Ttablets
I I ~forty-nine
rlld
contents, date, and influence of the Creation Serics, ~lnicrlbcil
; l ~ ~ p ~
,,~\.ith
b c tcsf of Llle
Enwma eZiz, have been dealt with, it remains to tcrevtio,,
describe in some detail the forty-nine fragments andseriCs.
tablets from which the text, transliterated and translated in the following pages, has been made up. After
each registration-number is given a refere~lceto the
published copy of the text in Cz~~zeijorncT e x t s from
BabyZouian TabZets, etc., itr the B ~ i t i s hMz~sez~nz,
pt. xiii,
or in Vol. I I of this work, or in Appendices I and I I
of this volume ; a brief description of each tablet is
added,, together with references to ally previous
publication of the text. After the enumeration of
the known copies of each tablet, a list is given of the
authorities for the separate lines of thc tablet, in order
to enable the reader to verify any passage in the-text
with as little delay as possible.
The following twelve tablets a11d fragments are c o p i e s o f t i > e
Firif 'Tablet of
inscribed with portions of the text of the First Tablet
of the series :1. K. 5 , 4 1 9 ~: Cunezform Texts, pt. xiii ( ~ g o ~pl.
) , I.
Obverse : 11. I - 16 ; Reverse : catch-line and
colophon.
Tr

n ~ s

XCVIII

Copies ol the
First
the Creation
Series.

INTRODUCTION

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 3+ in. by 1% in. For earlier
publications of the text, see George Smith, T S . B . A . , vol. iv,
p . 363 f., pl. i ; Fox Talbot, T.S.B.A., vol. v, pp. 428 ff. ;
Rlenant, Manuel de la langue Assyrienne, p. 378 f. ; Delitzscti,
Assynjche Lrsestiicke, 1st ed., p. 40, 2nd ed., p. 78, 3rd ed.,
p. 93 ; Lyoo, Assynhn Manual, p. 62; and my First Sleps in
Assyrian, p. I 2 2 f.

2. No. 93,015 (82-7-14, 402) : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii,
pls. I and 3.
Obverse: 11. I - 16 ; Reverse :
11. 124--142 and colophon.
Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 26 in. by 2? in. For
an earlier publication of the text, see Pinches, Bad. Or. Rec.,
vol. iv, p. 26f. T h e fragment is probably part of the same
tablet as that t o which No. l o belonged.

3. No. 45,528 + 46,614 : Vol. 11, pls. i-vi. Obverse :
11. I -48 ; Reverse : 11. I I I - 142, catch-line, and
colophon.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two rragments,
which I have joined; zain. by skin. This text has not been
previously published.

4. N o . 3 j , 1 3 4 : V01.11,pl.vii.
no reverse.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet,
has not been previously publislied.

0bverse:ll.

11-21;

in. by z in.

This text

1%

5. No. 36,726: Val. 11, pl. viii. Obverse : 11. 28-33.
Neo-Babylonian " praclice.tahletn ; the text, which forms
an extract, measures
previously published.

2.g

in. by

I$

in.

This text has not been

6. 81-7-27, 80: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl.
11. 31-56 ; Reverse : 11. I 18-142.

2.

Obverse:

Part of a n Assyrian tablet, 2% in. by 3 in. This text, which
was referred to by Pinches in the Bab. Or. Rec., vol. iv, p. 33,
was used by Zimmern for his translation in Gunkel's SchbpJung

AUTIIORITIES FOR TABLET I.

XCIX

und Chaos, p. 402 f. ; it was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,

copies

Weltsch8pfungsepos, p. z g f., and by Jensen, Mythen u~zd@en,
pp. z ff.

Scries.

7. K. 3,938 : Czm. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 3. Obverse :
11. 33-42 ; Reverse: 11. 128-142.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, I in. by i t i n . This fragment
was used by George Smith, Chnldean Account of Genesis, p. 9 3 f.,
and by subsequent translators ; the text was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltsch'ipfungsepos,p. 27.

8. K. 7,87 1 : Vol. I, Appendix I I, pp. I 83 ff. Obverse :
11. 33-47 ; no reverse.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, I + in. by
may belong to the same tablet as No.
been previously published.

I$
11.

in. T h e fragment
This text has not

9. No. 36,688 : Vol. 11, pl. vii. Obverse : 11. 38-44.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian " practice-tablet" ; the text, which
forms an abstract, measures 13in. by bin. This text has not
been previously published.

10. No. 46,803 : Val. 11, pls. ix-xi. Obverse,
Reverse : 11. 83-103.

11.

16-57;

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, z in. by z in. The fragment
is probably part of the same tablet AS :hat to -.vh:cl; NG. z
belonged. This text has not been previously published.

11. K. 4,488 : Vol. I, Appendix 11, pp. 185 ff.
Obverse : 11. 50-63 ; no reverse.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, I $ in. by I + in. ; see above, No. 8.
This text has not been previously published.

12. 82-9-18, 6,879: Vol. 11, pls. xii and xiii.
obverse ; Reverse : 11. 93-1 18.
Part o f a Neo-Babylonian tablet, ipin. by zsin.
has not been previously published.

No

This text

~~:i~~aP~,"~'Jf

C

Authoritiesfor
the linen of the
First Tablet.

INTRODUCTIOh'.

T h e authorities for the lines of the First Tablet are
as follows :-

TABLET
I.
: Nos. I , 2, and 3.
11. 1-10
11. 11-16 : Nos. I , 2 , 3 , a n d 4 .
11. 17-2 I : NOS. 3 and 4.
11. 22-27 : NO. 3.
11. 28-30 : Nos. 3 and 5.
11. 31-32 : Nos. 3, 5 , and 6.
: Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8.
1. 33
11. 34-37 : NOS. 3, 6, 7, and 8.
11. 38-42 : Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
: Nos. 3, 6, and 8.
1. 43
: Nos. 3, 6, 8, and 9.
1. 44
: Nos. 3, 6, and 8.
1. 45
11. 46-47 : Nos. 3, 6, 8, and 10.
: Nos. 3, 6, and 10.
1. 43
: Nos. 6 and 10.
I. A?
11. 59-56 : Nos. 6, 10, and 1 I .
:I. 57-63 : Nos. 10 and I 1.
11 64-67 : No. 10.
11. 68-82 : Wanting.
11. 83-92 : N o 10.
11. 93-103 : Nos. 10 and 12.
11. 104-1 10 : No. 12.
11. 111-117 : NOS.3 and 12.
: Nos. 3, 6, and 1 2 .
1. 118
11. 119-123 : Nos. 3 and 6.
11. 124-127 : NOS.2, 3, and 6.
11. 128-142 : NOS. 2, 3, 6, and 7.

CI

AUTIIORITIES FOR TABLET 11.

T h e following seven tablets and fragments are Second
copies of the
Tablet
inscribed with portions of the text of the Second Tablet g;;g,creation
of the series :13. No. 40,559 : Vol. 11, pls. xiv - xxi. Obverse :
11 I - ; Reverse : 11. ( I I I)-(140) catch-line, and
colophon.
Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, z9in. by qf in.
text has not been previously published.

This

14. No. 38,396 : Czm. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 4. Obverse :
11. I 1-29 ; Reverse : 11. ( I 0 ~ ) - ( 1 ~ 2 ) .
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3.iin. by z in.
has not been previously pnblished.

This text

15. No. 92,632 + 93,048 : Vol. 11, pls. xxii -xxiv.
Obverse : 11. 14-29 ; Reverse : 11. ( I 14)-(I3 I).
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two fragments
which I have joined ; gin. by r# in. This text has not been
previously published.

16. K. 4,832 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 5.
11. 32-58 ; Reverse : 11. (104)-(138).

Obverse :

Part of an Assyrian tablet, I + in. by 3) in. This tablet
was known to GeorgeSmith, see Chald. Acc. of Gm., p. 9 2 ;
its text was published by S. A. Smith, Miscellaneous Texts,
pl. 8 f.
17. 79-7-8, 178 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6. Obverse :

11. (69)-(75) ; Reverse : 11. (76)-(85).
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3Bin. by in. This text, which
was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, Weltsch6pfungsepos, p. 30, and by Jensen, Myfhen
und Epen, p. I o f.
18. K. 10,008 : Vol. I, App. 11, pp. 187 ff. No

obverse ; Reverse : probably between 11.85 and 104.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, in, by z i i n .
been previously published.

This text has not

CII

INTRODUCTION.

19. K. 292 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6.
Reverse : 11. ( I 3 I)-(140).

N o obverse ;

Lower part of an Assyrian tablet, *in. by z)in. The text
of this tablet, which was known to George Smith, was given
in transliteration by Delitzsch, Wcltschb~fungsepos,p. 3 1 , and
by Jensen, Mythen und Epen, p. 1 0 .
Authorities for
thrlinesofthe
Second Tablet,

T h e authorities for the lines of the Second Tablet
are as follows :-

11. 1-10
: NO. 13.
11. 11-13
: Nos. 13 and 14.
11. 14-29
: Nos. 13, 14, and 15.
11. 30-3 1
: NO. 13.
11. 32-40
: Nos. 13 and 16.
11. 41-58
: No. 16.
11. 59-(68)
: Wanting.
11. (69)-(85) : No. 17.
between 11. (86) and (103) : No. 18.
1. (104)
: No. 16.
1 ( I - ( I ) : Nos. 14 and 16.
1 . ( I 1 I ) I ) : Nos. 13, 14, and 16.
I . ( 1 1 ) - ( 1 6 ) : NOS. 13, 14, I j, and 16.
1. ( 1 2 7 )
: NOS. 13, 1j, and 16.
1 . ( 1 8 ) - ( I ) : NOS. 13, 14, 15, and 16.
1. (130)
: Nos. 13, I j, and 16.
1. (131)
: Nos. 13, I 5, 16, and 19.
1. (132)
: NOS. 13, 14, 16, and 19.
1. (
I
) : Nos. 13, 16, and 19.
11. (139)-(140) : NOS. 13 and 19.

AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET 111.

CIII

T h e following nine tablets and fragments arecopi~softhe
'Third Tvblct
inscribed with portions of the text of the Third of
t h e creation
Senrr.
Tablet :20. K. 3,473 + 7 9 - 7 4 296 + R. 615 : Can. Texts,
pt. xiii, pls. 7-9. Obverse : 11. 1-85 ; Reverse :
11. 86-138.
Parts of an Assyrian tablet, z+in. by 8$,i11. T h e three
fragments of this tablet, which have been recovered, join, but,
as they are much warped by fire, they have not been stuck
together. For earlier publications of the text, see S. A. Smith,
M~srellaneous Texts, pls. 1-5, and my First Steps z'n Asyyian,
pp. 124ff. The text of K. 3,473 had been already recognized
by George Smith, see Chald. Arc. Gen., p . 9 2 f.

21. No. 93,017 [88-4-19, 131 : Can. Texts, pt. xiii,
pls. r o and I 1. Obverse : 11. 47-77 ; Reverse :
11. 78-105.
, Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2+ in. by 3gin. This text,
which was identified by Pinches, mas given in transliteration
by Delitzsch, P!feZtschbp/un,arepos,p. 3b f.; and by Jensen, Myihen
und Epen, pp. I + &

22. 82-9-18, 1,403+ 6,316 [NO. 61,4291 : Vo1. 11,
pls. xxv-xxviii. Obverse: 11. 5-15, 52-61 ; Reverse:
11. 62-76, 124-128.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian " practice-tablet," inscribed with
2 in. by 3 in.
A copy of the text of 81-9-18, 1,403, is given in Gun. Texts,
pt. xiii, pl. 13 ; since then I have joined to it the fragment
82-9-18, 6,316, and the text is therefore repeated in Vol. 11.
This text has not been previously published.

a series of five-line extracts from the, text ;

23. K. 8,524 : Can. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 1 2 . Fragment
from the end of Obv. or beginning of Rev. :
11. 75-86.
Part of an Assyrian tablet,

bin. by 18in. T h e text was

CIV

INTRODUCTION.

referred to by Pinches in the Bab. Or. REC.,
vol. iv, p. 30, and
was given in transliteralion by Delitzsch, Weltsciidpfc~~i~sc$os,
P. 3'.

Copies of the
Third
of the Creation
Series.

24. 82-9-18, 6,950+ 83-1-18, 1,868 : Vol. 11, pl. xxix.
Duplicate of 11. 19-26 and 77-84 ; variants are
noted in the text under 11. 19-26.
Neo-Babylonian 'Lpractice-tablet"; the text forms an extract
measuring z9in. by ]+in. A copy of the text of 83-1-18, 1,868,
is given in Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. I Z ; since then I have joinccl
to it the fragment 82-9-18, 6,950, and the text is therefore
repeated in Vol. 11. This text bas not becn previously
published.

25. K. 6,650: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 9. Duplicate
of 11. 38-55 and 96-1 1 3 ; variants are noted in the
text under 11. 38-55.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 in. by 3$in.
been previously published.

This text has not

26. No. 42,285 : Vo1. 11, pls. XXX-xxxiii. Obverse
11. 46-68 ; Reverse : 11. 69-87.

:

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, z i i n . by 29in. This text
has not been previously published.

27. 82-9-18, 5,448 +83-1-18, 2,116: Vol. 11, pl. xxxiv.
Obverse : 11. 64-72.

28.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet"; the text, which
forms an extract, measures zsin. by I + in. A copy of the text
of 83-1-18, z , r 16, is given in Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, 111. 1 2 ; since
then I have joined to it the fragment 82-9-18, 5,448, and
the text is therefore repeated in Vol. 11. This text has not
been previously published.
K. 8,575 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. I 2. Obverse :

11. 69-76 ; Reverse : 11. 77-85.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2 %in. by z+in. This text, which
was identified by Llezold, Cniaiogue, p. 941, was given in
transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltschiipfti~r,o.iejos,11. 38.

AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET 111.

CV

for
The authorities for the lines of the Third Tablet Authorities
tlie lilies orthe
Third Tablet.
are as follows :-

11. 1'4
11. 5-1 j
11. 16-18
11. 2 9 - 2 6

NO. 20.
: NOS. 2 0 and 22.
: No. 20.
: NOS. 2 0 and 24.
11. 2 7 - 3 7 : NO. 20.
11. 38-45 : Nos. 2 0 and 25.
1. 46
: Nos. 20, 2 5 , and 26.
11. 4 7 - 5 1 : NOS. 20, 21, 25, and 26.
11. 5 2 - 5 5 : NOS. 2 0 , 21, 22, 25, and 26.
11. 56-63 : Nos. 20, 21, 22, and 2 6 .
11. 64-68 : Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 27.
11. 6 9 - 7 2 : Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28.
11. 73-74 : NOS. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 28.
11. 75-76 : Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, and 28.
11.-77-84 : Nos. 20, 21, 23, 24, 2 6 , and 28.
1. 85
: Nos. 20, 21, 23, 26, and 28,
1. 86
: Nos. 20, 2 1 , 23, and 26.
1. 87
: Nos. 20, 21, and 26.
11. 88-95 : Nos. 2 0 and 21.
11. 96-105 : Nos. 20, 2 I , and 25.
11. 106-1 13 : Nos. 2 0 and 25.
11. 1 1 4 - 1 2 3 : NO. 20.
11. 1 2 4 - 1 2 8 : NOS. 2 0 and 22.
11. 1 2 9 - 1 3 8 : NO. 20.
:

CVI

Copies of the
Yourth Tablet
of the Creation
Series.

INTRODUCTION.

T h e following six tablets and fragments are inscribed
with portions of the text of the Fourth Tablet :29. No. 93,016 [82-9-18, 3,7371 : Can. Texts, pt. xiii,
pls. 14-15. Obverse: 11. 1-44; Reverse: 11. I 16-146.
Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3+in. by 4k in.
For an earlier publication of the text, see Budge, P.S.B.A.,
"01. x, p. 86, pls. 1-6.

30. K. 3,437 + R. 641 : C U ~Texts,
.
pt. xiii, pls. 16-19.
Obverse : 11. 36-83 ; Reverse : 11. 84-1 19.
For an earlier
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 in. by 5:in.
publication of the text of K. 3,437, see George Smith,
T.S.B.A., vol. iv, p. 363f., pls. 5 and 6 ; and of IC. 3,437+
R. 641, see Delitzsch, Assyrische Lesestiiche, pp. 97 ff., and my
First Sfeps in Assyrian, pp. 137 ff.

31. 79-74>25" Cnn. Texts, pt. xiii, pl.
11. 35-49 ; Reverse : 11. 103-107.

20.

Obverse:

Part of an Assyrian tablet, I in. by z+in. T h e text, which
was identified by Pinches, was used in transliteration by
Delitzsch, WeZls~hb$~ungsepos,
pp. 41 Pi., and by Jensen, Mythen
und Epen, pp. zz ff. This fragment probably belongs to the
same tablet as No. 34.

32. No. 93,051 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl.
11. 42-54 ; Reverse : 11. 85-94.

20.

Obverse:

Part of a Neo-Babylonian " practice-tablet." inscribed with
the text divided into sections of five lines ; 2 % in. by ,Bin. This
text has not been previously published.

33. K. 5 , 4 2 0 ~: Czn. Texts, pt. xiii, pl.
11. 74-92 ; Reverse : 11. 93-1 19.

21.

Obverse :

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3:2in. by 38in. Restorations
and variants were taken from this tablet by George Smith for
his edition of K. 3,437 ; see above, No. 30.

34. R. 2, 83 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 19. No obverse ;
Reverse : 11. I 17-129.

AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET IV.

CVII

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2: in. by rg- in. T h e text, which
was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, Weltsch'b$fungs@os, p. 45. This fragment probably
belongs to the same tablet as No. 31.

The authorities for the lines of the Fourth Tablet ~"thoriti~~
the lines of the
for
Fourth Tablet.
are as follows :TABLET
IV.
11. 1-34
: NO. 29.
: Nos. 29 and 31.
1. 35
11. 36-41 : Nos. 29, 30, and 31.
11. 42-44 : NOS. 29, 30, 31, and 32.
11. 45-49 : NOS. 30, 31, and 32.
11. 50-54 : NOS. 30 and 32.
11. 55-73 : NO. 30.
11. 74-84 : Nos. 30 and 33.
11. 85-94 : NOS. 30, 32, and 33.
11. 95-102 : NOS. 30 and 33.
11. 103-107 : Nos. 30, 31, and 33.
11. 108-1 15 : Nos. 30 and 33.
1. 116
: Nos. 29, 30, and 33.
1 1 1 - 1 1 : NOS. 29, 30, 33, and 34.
11. 120-129 : NOS. 29 and 34.
11. 130-146 : NO. 29.
The following five tablets and fragments are inscribed ~c,i~ i i t hTablet
the of
the Creatioo
with portions of the text of the Fifth Tablet :Series.
35. K. 3,567 +
8,588 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 2 2 .
Obverse : 11. 1-26 ; Reverse : catch-line.
Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 3+ in. by zk in. For
earlier publications of the text, see George Smith, T.S.B.A.,
vol. iv, p. 363 f., pl. z ; Delitzsch, Assynjche Lesesiiickc,
3rd ed., p. 9+; and my First Stc$s in Assyrian, pp. 1 5 8 ff.

CVIII

INTRODUCTION.

copies the 36. K. 8,526 : Cz~n.Tezis,pt, xiii, PI. 23.
Fifth Tublet of
the Creation
11. 1-18 ; Reverse : 11. (138)-(140).
Series.

Obverse :

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, I k in. by z i in. T h e text
was used by George Smith for his edition of No. 3 5 , and in
the other copies of that tablet mentioned above ; it was given
in transliteration by Delitzsch, Weitsch~~fungsepos,
p. 48 f.

37. K. 13,774 : Vol. I, Appendix 11, pp. 190 ff.
Obverse : 11. 6-19 ; no reverse.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, ]kin. by ?Bin. This text bas
not been previously published.

38. K. I 1,641 : Vol. I, Appendix 11, pp. 192 ff.
Obverse : 11. 14 2 2 ; Reverse : 11. (128) -(140),
catch-line, and colophon.

-

Part of an Assyrian tablet, % t i n .by j#in.
not been previously published.

39. K. 3,449~2: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, ~ 123.
.
11. (66)-(74) ; Reverse : 11. (75)-(87).

This text has

Obverse :

Part of an Assyrian tablet, z?in. by gin. This text, which
was first identified and translated by George Smith, Chald. Acc.
of Gen., p. gqf., was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
WeZischb~fungsepos, pa 50, and the reverse by Jensen, Myihen
und Zpen, p. 32.
Autharitiesfor
the lines of the
Fi"h Tablet.

T h e authorities for the lines of the Fifth Tablet are
as follows :-

TABLET
V.
11. 1-5
11. 6-13
11. 14-18
1. 19
11. 2 0 - 2 2
11. 23-26

: Nos. 35 and 36.

Nos. 35, 36, and 37.
: Nos. 35, 36, 37, and '38.
: Nos. 35, 37, and 38.
: Nos. 35 and 38.
: No. 35.

:

AUTHORITIES FOR TABLETS V AND V1.

CIX

11. 27-(65)
: Wanting.
11. (66)-(87) : No. 39.
11. (88)-(I 27) : Wanting.
1 ( 1 8 ) - ( I ) : NO. 38.
11 ( I - ( I ) : Nos. 36 and 38.
T h e following fragment is inscribed with a portion Slxth
copy of the
Tablet of
t h e Creailon
of the text of the Sixth Tablet :Seller.
40. No. 92,629: Vol. 11, pls. xxxv and xxxvi.
Obverse : 11. 1 - 2 I ; Reverse : 11. 138-146, catchline, and colophon.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, z+ in. by zt in. This text
has not been previously published.

The following nine tablets and fragments are g;p;;p;et
inscribed with portions of the text of the Seventh g : ; ~ ~ , ~ r ~ ~ t i o n
Tablet :41. K. 2,854: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 159. Obverse :
11. 1-18 ; Reverse uninscribed.
Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, z+in. by
has not been previously published.

if

in. This text

42. No. 91,135 + 93,073 : Vol. 11, PIS. xxxviii -xlv.
Obverse : 11. 3-40 ; Reverse : 11. 106-141.
Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, zQin. by +%in. This text
is made up of two fragments which I have joined ; it has not
previously been published.

43. K . 8,522 : Cun. Tezts, pt. xiii, pls. 26 and
Obverse : 11. 15-45 ; Reverse : 11. 105-137

2 j.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, z+in. by 3 t i n For earlier
publications of the text, see George Smith, T.S.B.A., vol. iv,
p. 363 f., pls. j and 4, and Delitzsch, Assyn'rche Lesestiicke,
3rd ed., p. 95 f.

CX

copies
,,ithe

Seventh Tablet
orthecreation
Series.

INTRODUCTION,

44. No. 35,506 : Vol. 11, pls. xlvi-xlviii.
11. 14-36; Reverse : 11. ~ o j - 1 4 2 .

Obverse :

Part of aNeo-Babylonian tablet, z t i n . by 4+in. This text,
which probably dates from the period of the Arsacidae, has
not been previously published.

45. K. 9,267 : Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 28.
11. 40-47 ; Reverse : 11. 109-138.

Obverse :

Part of an Assyrian tablet, j f in. by 2 in. Restorations and
variants were taken from this tablet by George Smith for his
edition of I<. 8,522 ; see above, No. 43.

46. K. 12,830 : Vo1. I, Appendix I, p. 163. Obverse
or Reverse : between 11. 47 and 105.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, +in. by %in. This text has not
been previously published.

47. K. I 3,761 : Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 1 6 4 End of
Obverse and beginning of Reverse: between
11. 47 and 105.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, r + in. by
not been previously published.

I

;in.

This text has

48. K. 8,519 : Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 165. End of
Obverse and beginning of Reverse : between
11. jr7 and 105.
Part of an Assyrian tablet, 18in. by
not been previously published.'

I

$ in.

This text has

49. K. 13,337 : Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 166. Duplicate
of No. 48 ; between 11. 47 and 105.

+

Part of an Assyrian tablet, in. by I in. This text, which
is a duplicate of I<.8,519, has not been previously published.

'

I learn from Professor Zimmern that he also has identified this
fragment as part of the Seventh Tablet by its correspondence with
the commentary K. 4,406, published in I1 R, p1. 3 1 (see below,
p, cxviii).

AUTHORITIES FOR TABLET VII.

CXI

The authorities for the lines of the Seventh Tablet Authoritierfor
tile lillei of the
are as follows :Seventh
Tablet.

TABLET
VII.
11. 1-2
: NO. 41.
11. 3-13
: NOS. 41 and 42.
1. 14
: Nos. 41, 42, and 44.
11. 15-18 : Nos. 41, 42, 43, and 44.
11. 19-36 : Nos. 42, 43, and 44.
11. 37-39 : NOS.42 and 43.
1. 40
: Nos. 42, 43, and 45.
11. 41-45 : Nos. 43 and 45.
11. 46-47 : N o 45.
between 11. 47 and 105 : Nos. 46, 47, 48, and 49.
1. 105
: Nos. 43 and 44.
11. 106-108 : Nos. 42, 43, and 44.
11. 109-137 : Nos. 42, 43, 44, and 45.
1. 138
: Nos. 42, 44, and 45.
1 . 1 - 1 1 : NOS.42 alld 44.
1. I42
: NO. 44.
The above forty-nine tablets and fragments, inscribed ~
with portions of the text of the Creation Series, belong tlie tablets.
to two distinct periods. T h e older class of tablets
were made for the library of Ashur - bani -pal at
Nineveh, and they are beautifully written in the
Assyrian character upon tablets of fine clay.' T h e

'

That the copies were not always made from Babylonian tablcts
is proved by the colophon of K. 292 (cf. Cun. Tenis, pt. xiii, pl. 6),
which states that this copy of the Second Tablet was made from

of
~

~

~

~

CXII

INTRODUCTION.

nescriptionor
Neo-Babylonian
the tablets.

tablets, on the other hand, are, as
a rule, less carefully written ; they vary considerably
in size and shape, and were made at different periods
for private individuals, either for their own use,' or
that they might be deposited in the te~nples as
votive offerings2 Some of these Babylonian copies
an Assyrian archetype (gab-n' '"""'AA;iurX'). Upon some tablets
Ashur-bani-pal's label was scratched after the tablet had been
baked, e.g., K. 3.567
I<. 8,588 (Czin. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 22).
Other Assyrian copies, though giving the catch-line to the next
tablet, are without colophons, e.g., I<.3.473, etc. (cf. Czin. Texfs,
pt. xiii, pl. g ) , and I<. 8,526 (cf. Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 23) ; the copy
of the last tablet, K. 2,854 (see below, p. rgq), the reverse of which
is blank, was probably also without a colophon.
' Cf. No. 40,559 (vol. ii, pl. xxi), a copy of the Second Tablet
which was niade for a certain Nahi-abti-iddina; and No. 45,528+
46,614 (vol. ii, pl. vi), a copy of the First Tablet, mhich is described
as the property of Nahi-mcshetik-urri, a worshipper of Marduli and
Sarpanitu, and is said to have been copied from an original at
Babylon on the ninth day of Ipyar, in the twenty-seventh year of
Darius. A certain Nabu-balitsn-ikbi, the son of Na'id-Marduk,
appears to have owned a complete set of the Seven Creation
Tablets, for we possess fragments of the First and of the Sixth
Tablet in the series which belonged to him (cf. No. 93,ors,
Cun. Texts, pl. j , where the first word of the second line of the
colophon, which puzzled Delitzsch, is clearly 6z~;zi; No. 46,803,
vol. ii, pls. ixff. ; and No. 92,629, vol. ii, pl. xxxvii).
' Thus the fine copy of the Fourth Tablet, No. 93,016, which
was written by the scribe Nabu-btilishu, was, according to its
colophon (cf. Cun. Texfs, pt. xiii, pl. 1 5 ) . deposited by the smith
Na'id-Marduk as a votive offering in the temple E-zida. I n his
transliteration of this colophon Delitzsch has made an odd blunder;
he has not recognized the common phrase ana d n i a nnp&itL'*-s'u,
"for the preservation of his life," which occurs at the end of
line 3 of the colophon, and has taken it as a proper name

+

DESCRIPTION OF THE TABLETS.

CXIII

are fine specimens of their class, e.g. Nos. 3, I 3, 2 I , ~ ~ ~of
the tublecs.
29, and 42,' and the characters and words upon them
are carefully written and spaced ; others, however,
consist of small, carelessly made tablets, on to which
the poem is c r o ~ d e d . ~On all the tablets, whether
Assyrian or Babylonian, which possess colophons,
the number of the Tablet in the Series is carefully
given.3 T h e extracts from the text, which were
written out by students upon "practice-tablets," no
doubt in order to give them practice in writing and
at the same time to enable them to learn the text
by heart, are naturally rather rough productioi~s.~
One characteristic which applies to all the tablets,
~

-

~

p

Weltschbp?fi~ngsepos,
p. +I), a transliteration which
turns the sentence into nonsense.
' See pls. ii, iii, iv, and vi, and the frontispiece to Vol. 11.
Photographic reproductions of the reverse of No. 2 1 and the
obverse of No. 29 are given in the Guide to the Bnblojzian and
As~yrianAntryuz'iies in the Rritish Museum, pls. vi and vii.
C t e.g., Nos. 93,015 (No. z ) , 46,803 (No. l o ) , and 92,629
(No. 40). all of which were probably written by the same scribe.
Cf. the nates dupju ZxANE-nu-ma e.lZ on No. 45,528, etc.
("01. ii, pl. vi); duppu E-nu-ma e-Zi; ri-e; on No. 93,015 (Cun.
Ttxts, pt. xiii, pl. 3 ) ; [dupjlu ZIX,'" E-nu-ma e-Zi: on I<. 7.92
(Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 6 ) ; duppu IVKAm'w"E-nu-nzn e-li;, which
follows a note as to the number of lines in the text upon No. 93,016
(Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 15) ; and dnj-pi VKA*f.MEE-nu-ma
e-li: on
K. 3,567 (Cun. Trxts, pt. xiii, pl. 22).
T h e " practice-tablets" fall into two classes. I n one class
the tablets are wholly taken up with portions of tile text of the
Creation Series, which is written out upon them in sec~ionsof
five verses separated by horizontal lines ; cf. Nos. 82-9- 18,
" T I N - Z I ~ ~ - ; U(see

H

~

~

i

~

t

i

~

CXIV

TheAssyrian
and NeoBabylonian
forms of the
tent.

INTRODUCTION.

whether Assyrian or h'eo-Babylonian, is that the text
is never written in columns, but each line of the poem
is written across the tablet from edg-e to edge.' As
a result, the tablets are long and narrow in shape,
and are handled far more conveniently than broader
tablets inscribed with two or more columns of writing
on each side.
The forms of the text of the poem, which were in
use in the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian periods, are
identical, and it is incorrect to spealc of an Assyrian
and a Babylonian "recension."
At the time of
Ashur-bani-pal the text had already been definitely
fixed, and, with the exception of one or two phrases,
the words of each line remained unchanged from that
time forward. It is true that on the Babylonian
tablets the words are, as a rule, written more
syllabically, but this is a general characteristic of
Babylonian copies of historical and literary texts.
Moreover, upon several of the more carefully written
tablets, the metre is indicated by the division of thc

+

1,403 6,361 (No. zz) and 93,051 (No. 32). I n the other class
short extracts from the text are inscribed upon tablets containing
other matter, all of which the pupil has written out for practice;
cf. Nos. 36.726 (No. 5), 36,688 (No. q ) , 8z-9-18, 6,gjo + 83-1-18,
1,868 (No. z4).and82-9-18,5,448
83-1-18, 2,116 (No. 27). T h e
second class are the more carelessly written of the two.

+

' T h e only apparent exceptions to this rule occur on some of the
Neo-Babylonian tablets,inwhich two lines of the text areoccasionally
written on one line of the tablet when they are separated from each
other by a division-mark. This is simply due to want of space,
which necessitated the crowding of the text.

FORMS OF TEXT.

CXV

halves of each verse,' an arrangement which is not
met with on any of the Assyrian tablets. But both
the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian copies represent the
same " recension" of the text, and, as has already
been indicated,= are probably the descendants of
a common Babylonian original. The following table
will serve to show the number of Assyrian and NeoBabylonian copies of each of the Seven Tablets under
which the forty-nine separate fragments of the text
may be arranged :-

I

Four copies (Nos. Four copies Two "practice- the
~ ~number
b showing
l e of
I , 6, 7, 8, I I ) .
(Nos. 2, 3, 4,
tablets "
$,";?Eby4lld
1 0 , 12).
(Nos. 5 , 9). onian
copies
of the Seven
Nos. 8 and 11 are ~robably parts of the- same
tablet.

Nos. z and 10 are
probably parts of
the same tablet.

I I Four copies (Nos. Three copies
16, 17, 18, 19).
(Nos. 13, 14,
Nos. 18 and 19 are probably not parts of the same
tablet.

15).

I11 Four copies (Nos. Two copies
2 0 , 23,
28).
. 25,
Nor. 23 and 25 are probablv not Darts of the same
tablet ;-it is possible,
however, that No. 23 is
Dart of a CODY of Tahl. 11.
;ts text ea;&sponding to
11. 13-24.

'

Three " prac(NOS.21, 26). tice-tablets "

S e e below, p. cxxii.
S e e above, pp. lxxii

ff.

~'~hlets.

CXVI

INTRODUCTION.

Table
TADLET. ASSYRIAN
TEXT.
NEO-BAB.
TBXT. NEO-BAH.EXTRACTS.
the number of
.
A and ~
~ Three
~
copies
~
~
~One~copy
One "practiceNeo-Babylonian copier
(Nos. 30, 31, 33. (NO. 29).
tablet "
of theseven
Tablets.
34).
(NO. 32).
Nos. 31 and 34 are proba.
bly parts of the same
tablet.

IV

V

Four, or five,
copies (Nos. 35,
36, 37, 38, 39).
Nos. 35 and 39 are possibly parts of the same
tablet.

VI

One copy
(Nor 40).

VII Four, or five, Two copies
copies (Nos. 41, (Nos. 42,44).
43, 45, 46, 473
48, 49).
Nos. 41 and 46 are grobably parts of the'same
tablet, and Nos. 47 and
49 s e probably parts of
another tablet ; it is
possible that No. 45 is
a oart of the same tablet
*;NOS.
41 and 46.
Assyrian

Commentaries
to the Seventh
Tablet.

In the arrangement and interpretation of the
text of the Seventh Tablet we receive considerable
assistance from some fragments of Assyrian commentaries which have come down to us. These were
compiled by the Assyrian scribes in order to explain
that composition, and they are of the greatest value
for the study of the text. T h e contents of these
docaments, and their relation to the text of the Seventh

ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES.

CXVII

Tablet, are described in detail in Appendix I,' but the
following
- facts with regard to the size of the tablets
inscribed with the commentaries, and to previous
publications of portions of them, may here be conveniently given.
T h e most important class of commentary takes ,,the
t,,,,,c
of the first
form of a bilingual list, and, as has been pointed out CI-S.
elsewhere,= presupposes the existence of a Sumerian
version of part of the text of the Seventh Tablet of
the Creation Series. T h e text of the commentary is
inscribed in a series of double columns ; in the left
half of each column it gives a list of the Sumerian
words, or ideograms, and, in the right half, opposite
each word is added its Assyrian equivalent. It is
noteworthy that the list is generally arranged in the
order in which the words occur in the Assyrian text
of the Seventh Tablet. The colun~nsof the cammentarv are divided into a number of compartments,
or sections, by horizontal lines impressed upon the
clay, and the words within each compartment
refer either to separate couplets, or to separate lines,
of the Seventh Tablet. Of this class of commentary
we possess six fragments of two large tablets which
were inscribed with five or six double columns of
writing on each side; the two tablets are duplicates
of one another, having been inscribed with the same

' See below, pp.

157

A:

See above, p. Ixxix, n.

I,

and below, p. 1 5 8 ,

CXVIII

INTRODUCTION.

-- - -

-

-

version of the commentary. T h e following is a
description of the six separate fragments, the two
large tablets, to which they belong, being headed
respectively A and I3 :Fragments of
ti,efirstc~arrofA.
( I ) S. 11 + S. 980+ S. 1,416. For the text, see
Commentary.
Vol. 11, pls. li-liii and lv ; cf. also App. I,
pp. 158 ff., 167 f.

T h e fragment is the top left hand portion of the tablet;
it measures +in. by 7 in. The text of S. r r + S. 980 was
published in V R., pl. 2 1 , No. 4. The fragment S. 1,416,
which I have joined to the other two, has not been previously
published.
(2)

K. 4,406. For the text, see Vol. 11, pls. liv-lv ;
cf. also App. I, pp. 163 ff.

The fragment is. the top right hand portion of the tablet;
it measures 4:in. by +Bin. The text has been previously
published in I1 R., pl. 3 1 , No. z.

(3)

For the text, sec Vol. 11, pl. liv ;
cf. also App. I, p. 162.

82-3-23, 151.

T h e fragment measures
previously published.

B.

(I)

.

I;

in. by z: in.; it has not been

R. 366+ 80-7-19, 288 + 293.

For the text,
see Vol. 11, pls. Ivi-lviii ; cf. also App. I,
pp. I 60, I 68 f.

T h e fragment is from the left side of the tablet ; it measures
z~ In.
'
by bin. T h e fragment R. 366 was published in V R.,
pl. 21, No. 3 ; 80-7-19. 293, was joined to it by Bezold,
Catalogue, p. 1,608. The third fragment, 80-7-19, 288, was
identified by Zimmern and published in the Zeih. fir Assyr.,
xii, p. qor f.

ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES.

(2)

CXIX

K . 2 , 0 5 3 . For the text, see Vol. 11, pls. lix-lx ;
cf. also App. I, pp. 161, 167 f.

This fragment measures 1-8in. by zBin.; it has long been
S. 980 (see Bezold, Catalogue,
known to be aduplicateof S. I I
p. 396), but its text has not been previously published.

+

( 3 ) K . 8,299. For the text, see Vol. I I, pl. Ix ;
cf. also A ~ ~ . 'p.I ,162 f.
This fragment measures 3 in. by
previously published.

in.; it has not been

In addition to the above commentary in the form ~
h
and third
of a bilingual list, we possess single specimens of C I S S S ~ ~ ~
Commentary.
a second and a third class of explanatory text. The
second class contains a running commentary to
passages selected from other Tablets of the Creation
Series in addition to the Seventh, and is represented
by the tablet S. 747.' The third class, represented by
the obverse of the tablet I<. 2,107 + K. 6,086,' gives
explanations of a number of titles of Marduk, several
of which occur in the recovered portions of the text of
the Seventh Tablet. Each of these two commentaries
furnishes information on various points with regard to

' T h e tablet S. 747, which measures ++in. by 36in., is published
in Cun. Texis, pt. xiii, pl. 32, and its connection with the text of
the Creation Series is described in Appendix I, p. r j o f. T h e
text was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, U'ei!schii$fungsepos,
p. 58f.
T h e ' t a h l e t I<.z,1o7+K. 6,086, which measures q i n . by 5+in.,
is published in Vol. 11, plate lxif., and a transliteration and
a translation of the text are given in Appendix I, pp. 171 ff. Col. ii of
the single fragment K . z , 1 0 7 was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
WelfschV$fungsegos, p. 1 5 5 .

~
~

~

~

~

CXX

INTRODUCTION.

the interpretation of the Seventh Tablet, but, as may
be supposed, they do not approach in interest the six
fragments of the conunentary of the first class.
The
T h e transliteration of the text of the Creation
recon~truction
o f t h e t e x t o f Series, which is given in the following pages, has
the Creation
Series.
been made up from the tablets, fragments, and

NumbeWof

the lmes.

extracts enumerated on pp. xcvii ff. ; while several
passages in the Seventh Tablet have been conjecturally restored from the Assyrian Co~ninentaries
just described.
In the reconstruction of the text
preference has usually been given to the readings
found upon the Assyrian tablets, and the variant
readings of all duplicates, both Assyrian and NeoBabylonian, are given in the notes at the foot of the
page. T h e lines upon each tablet of the Series have
been numbered, and, where the numbering of a line is
conjectural, it is placed within parentheses. Great
assistatice in the numbering of the lines of detached
fragments of the text has been afforded by the fact
that upon many of t h e Neo-Babylonian copies every
tenth line is marked with a figure " 1 0 " in the lefthand margin ; in but few instances can the position of
a detached fragment be accurately ascerrained by its
shape. T h e lines upon the Second and Fifth Tablets
have been conjecturally numbered up to one hundred
and forty. Upon the Sixth Tablet the total number
of lines was one hundred and thirty-six or one hundred
and forty-six ; and, in view of the fact that the scribe
of No. 92,629 has continued the text to the bottom of

RECONSTRUCTION OF TEXT.

CXXI

the reverse of the tablet, the larger number is the lilies
~hcnumberof
ulmn the
more probable of the two. T h e following is a list of ?.ablcts.
the total number of lines inscribed upon each of the
Seven Tablets of the Series :Tablet I, 142 lines.

,,

11, (140) ,,
,, 111, 138 ,,
,, IV, 146 ,,
,
v, (140)
,, VI, 146 ,,
,, VII, 142 ,,
Although it is now possible to accurately estimate G.,,,,,,,l,
the number of lines contained by the Creation Series, '""'
there are still considerable gaps in the text of several
of the Tablets. T h e only Tablets in which the whole
or portions of every line are preserved are the Third
and Fourth of the Series. Gaps, where the text is
completely wanting, occur in Tablet I, 11. 68-82, and
in Tablet 11, 11. 59-(68)' T h e greater part of the
text of Tablet V is wanting, hut by roughly estimating
the position of the fragment K. 3,449a, which occurs
about in the centre of the text, we obtain two
gaps, between 11. 26 and (66) and between 11. (87) and
(128).
Of Tablet VI we possess only the opening
and closing lines, the rest of the text, from 1. 2 2 to
1. 137, being wanting. Finally, the g-ap in the text of
9 ,

' I n the gap in Tablet 11, 11. 86-103, may probably be inserted
the new fragment K. 10,008 ; see Appendix 11, pp. 187 A:

INTRODUCTION.

CXXII

~

h

the ponn.

~

Tablet VII, between 11. 47 and 105, is partly filled up
by the fragments KK. 12,830, 13,761, 8,519, 13,337,
which together give portions of thirty-nine lines.
some
copies the metre is
~Upon
~
~
t of ~the ~Babylonian
~
f
indicated in writing by the division of the halves of
each verse,' and, wherever this occurs upon any tablet
or duplicate, the division has, as far as possible,
been retained in the transliteration of the text. I n
accordance with the rules of Babylonian poetry, the
text generally falls into couplets, the second verse
frequently echoing or supplementing the first ; each of
the two verses of a couplet is divided into halves, and
each half-verse may be further subdivided by an
accented syllable.2 This four-fold division of each

+

'

O n Nos. 45,528 46,614 (No. j), 82-9-18, 6,879 (No. I?.),
38,396 (No. I+), 42,285 (NO. 26)) and 93,016 (No. 2 9 ) ; cf. also the
"practice-tablets," Nos. 82-9-18, 1,403
6,316 (No. 2 % ) and
82-9-18, 5,448
83-1-18, 2, 116 (No. 27).
For the first description of the metre of the poem, see Budge,
P.S.R.A., vol. vi, p. 7 ; and for later discussions of the metre of
Babylonian poetry in general, see Zimmern's papers in the Zeits.
fCr Asgyr., viii, pp. rzI ff., x, pp. I ff., xi, pp. 86 ff., and xii,
pp. 382 ff.; cf. also D. M. Mueller, Die Propheten in ihrer ursprl2ngIichen Fom, i, pp. 5 ff. I t may be noted that in addition to
the division of the text into couplets, the poem often falls
naturally into stanzas of four lines each. That the metre was
not very carefully studied by the Neo-Babylonian scribes is
proved by the somewhat faulty division of the verses upon some
of the tablets on which the metre is indicated, and also by the
fact that the pupils of the scribes were allowed, and perhaps told,
to write out portions of the poem in sections, not of four, but of
five lines each (see above, p. c x i ~ f.,
i n. 4).

+

+

ARRANGEMENT OF TEXT.

CXXIII

verse will be apparent from the following connected The
rnctre of
the poem.
transliteration of the first half-dozen lines of the
poem, in which the subdivisions of the verses are
marked in accordance with the system of the
Babylonian scribes as found upon the tablet
Sp, ii, 265a' :I

f. enuma

iapZii
3 f. Aps2ma
mummu
5 f. me' gip2ra

I
1
1

/
I

eZii
aamrnatum
riit~
Tiamat
iunu
Z2 k k u v a

11
I/

/
I

Zfi na6G

Suma
I/ zaru 11 muaZZidat
11 iritenii
11 susZ

/

I
I

iarnamu
Zi zakgrat
?un
gimriiun
ihikama
Z i Jee'i

It will be seen that the second verse of each couplet
balances the first, and the caesura, or division, in the
centre of each verse is well marked. The second half
of verse 3 and the first half of verse 5, each of which
contains only one word, may appear rather short for
scansion, but the rhythm is retained by dwelling on
the first part of the word and treating the suffix almost
as an independent word. It is unnecessary to transliterate more of the text of the poem in this manner,
as the simple metre, or rather rhythm, can be
detected without difficulty from the syllabic transliteration which is given in the following pages.

' Published by Zimrnern, Z.A., x, p.

17

f,

C4e $even C a e f e f ~of' f4e gigforp of
Creafion.

I.

e-nu-ma

2.

fa$

- Z~S"

e - liS'
- m a - &7?2

0.7%

3. A p s 2 i - m a 4

la

rif-tu-u

fu

nu-bu-u

- 7na

xa -

-

la

3

ru

fa-?nu-mu

-

xak

fu

-

- rat
un

4. m u u m - m u Ti - amat
s.mZ*'S'unu8

mu-a/-Zi-da-at Qi7n-ri-iu-un

6. gi-pa-ra

p ~ - j a - a ~ la

7. e - nu

-

la

- ma

8. {u m a

la

'

hi-c-ju-YU
zl~ini*'~

Z-te-nz;-' i - & i - h u - u - m a
la

fu-$n-u

xuK - Ku - rn1O f i - m a - t u

9. i6-6a-nu-u-ma'2

iirini

ie

-'

ma-na-ma
la

[{z-ma]"

Ri - r i [ b ] l3 ? [ a - m a - m i ] l4

' No.'+5,jz8 +q6,614, e-li-(f. For the principles on which the
text has been made up, see the Introduction.
' No. 93,015, j.u-mu.
No. 45,528, etc., fa$-Zi~i?'.
' No. 45,jz8, etc., omits ma; No. 93,015 reads ApsC(u).
' No. 93,015, mu-un-ma-al-li-da-a/(see the Glossary).
NO. 93,01Sr mi*'-Ju-un; No. qg,sz8, etc., mu-u-fu-nu.
' No. 93,015, gi-par-ra la ku-su-ru.
a No. 45,528, etc., iltini.
NO. 93,015, JU-pa-'.
'@
No. 93.015, Iu-um la zu-uk-hu-ru.
" Conjectural restoration; it is probable that not more than two
signs are wanting on K. 5,419~.

I.
2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

When in the height heaven was not named,
And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name,
And the primeval Apsu, who begat them,
And chaos, Tiamat, the mother of them both,Their waters were mingled together,
And no field was formed, no marsh was to be seen ;
When of the gods none had been called into being,
And none bore a name, and no destinies [were
ordained]" ;
Then were created the gods in the midst l3 of
[heaven],14

mais omitted by Nos. 93,015 and 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc.
The traces of the character upon No. 4 5 , j 2 8 , etc., suggest rib.
T h e first sign of the word in No. 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc., is probably t a ;
the restoration of the second half of the line as ki-ri[6] ;[a-ma-mi],
"in the midst of heaven," is therefore possible. T h e existence
of &Zmdmu, or "heaven," so early in the Creation-story is not
inconsistent with Marduk's subsequent acts of creation. After
slaying Tiamat his first act was to use half of her body as
a covering for the ;amZmu (cf. Tabl. IV, 1. 138, :a-ma ma
u-!a-al-lil); it is therefore clear that the ;am~mu was vaguely
conceived as already in existence.
la

IS

4

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

13. u r - - hu 7
~i7~29'
14. " ' A - n u @ a-piL'0-J'u-nu
I 5 . An .Jar
""A - n u m
. 12~7n'~
16. u
A
17. '"'Nu-di7e-mud s'a a&"-iu
18.pal-kaI4 u z - n u &a-sis
1 9 . g ~ - U S - f u rm a - a - d i - i s "
zo. la i-ii ;[a]-n[i]-nu l6
2 1 . in-uin-du.ma" [ . . . 1-uI8

US

[
[

- $ i 8[

. . . . . . I

. . .

] lzu" [ . . . . ]

. . . . . . . . 1
ztt-[ . . . . . . . 1
a - Lid13 - [ . . . . ]
e(?) .[ . . . . . ]I5
[ . . . . . . . . ]
[ . . . . . . . . 1
[ . . . . . . . . 1

'

Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015 insert the copula u.
T h e end of the line should possibly he restored as [mlz-&a-ri;],
"together," or "at one time."
No. 93,015 reads a-di-i. I t is preferable to take the word as
the plur. of the subs. adz, rather than as thc prep. adi, which is not
written with the long final vowel.
Nos. 45,528. etc., and 35,134 insert the copula u.
No. 45,528, etc., 1%-ba-nu-ma.
If the reading e-l[i]-fu-[nu
] he correct, the second
half of the line possibly refers to the precedence in rank taken by
AnSar and KiSar over Lahmu and Labamu. This suggestion is
based on the fact that it is AnEar, and not Lahmu, to whom E a
appeals on hearing of the revolt of Tiamat, and that it is AnSar
who subsequently directs the movements of the gods.
No. 45,528, etc., u-ur-n'-ku; No. 35,134, u-tir-ri-Ku; No.
93,015, u-ri-ki.
K. 5,419creads u[r1; No. 45,528, etc.. u-us-ri; in
the translation I have taken the word as the Pret. Iial. from asir,
but it is possible that the word is not complete.
a

. . .

. . .

THE BIRTH OF THE GODS.

5

. 1.'

lo. Lahmu and Lahamu were called into being [ .
I I . Ages increased, [ . . . . 1,
12. Then AnSar and KiSar were created, and over
them [ . . . .
13. Long were the days, then there came forth [ . . ]
14. Anu, their son, [ . . . . . . . . . .
15. AnSar and Anu [ . . . . . . . . . . 1
16. And the god Anu [ . . . . . . . . .
17. Nudimmud, whom his fathers [his] begettersls [ . . ]
18. Abounding in all wisdom, [ . . . . . . I l5
1 9 . H e was exceeding strong [ . . . . . . . 1
2 0 . H e had no rival [ . . . . . . . . . .
1
2 I . (Thus) were established and [were . . . . .18
the great gods (?)1.

1."

I
I

Nos. 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc., 93,01 j, and 3 5 , 1 3 4 read '"'A-num.
Nos. 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc., and 3 5 , 1 3 4 prove that the traces of this sign
on K. 5,4196 and No. 9 3 , ~ are
~ s those o f p c not bi.
IL T i e traces upon No. 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc., suggest the reading
lo

[da-nil-nu.
" No. 3 5 , 1 3 4 , "'A-nu-urn.
No. 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc., are not clear.

T h e traces which follow upon

Is T h e word may possibly be restored a-lfd-[di-ju],
as suggested
in the translation.
No. 3 5 , 1 3 4 , jal-ku. ha-sis is probably a participle.
l5 L. 1 8 evidently contains a description 06 Nudimmud (Ea),
and, in view of the important part he plays in the First and Second
Tablets, it is not improbable that 11. 1 9 and zo also. refer eo hirn.
l6 This restoration is in accordance with the traces upon Nos.
3 5 , 1 3 4 and 4 5 , 5 2 8 , etc.
" No. 3 5 , ' 34, [in-nzit-d]z-u[ . . . 1.
'* u is evidently the final syllable of a second verb. T h e subject
of both verbs (possibly some such phrase as il2ni 7?r6iiLi, " the grcat
gods," cf. 1. z g ) was contained in the sccond half of the line.

6

CREATION S E I ~ I E S ,TABLET I

23. da - aZ - /iu

- nlln - ma

2 4
25.

26.

27

. .
. .
. .

. . . .
i-na Su-'-a-rua S , L - [ ~ . . .
, . .
. .
Za nu - fi - ir Apszi
[
. . . . .
u Ti-anzaf [Su]-ba-am-7nu-77z[a]-a[tlp
[ . . . .
27%-has-sa-am-m[ai]p5-Se-taG-~ZL-un
[ . . . . .
[

.

. -1
. I
. 1
. ]

.1

@-bat aZ- hat - su - nu &.nu(-)[t]i7 i - g a - 7izcs - Zn
zg. i - nu - i u
Apszi
aa ri iiiirzi ra- bi. u - t z ~ z
30. is - sz ma M u - n m - m u g sz~k-kaZ-La-fu i-auk-hay-&
28.

la

-

-

-

3 L. Mu-uin-mu9
suk-kaZ-Z~l0 71221 - tib - 6a ka - bit- t i - ia
32. a/-ka~n-ma~ i - r i - i S 1Ti-nnzatl2
l
i ni
[il - ii - i k ] l 3
33. il- ii- k u - nza k u - u d - m i T i - [mnntl'j sak - ~ I L
34. a-ma-ti inz-taZ-Li-ku aS-Sz7n il2lzi [vzn - ri - e - s'u - ulz] L'

' This restoration is not certain, but it is consistent with the
traces upon No. 45.528, etc., and it gives good sense. L. 2 , thus
concludes the account of the creation of the gods, and in 1. 2 2 the
narrative returns to Apsu and Tiamat.
T h e signs should possibly he divided as i-na Su-'-a.
T h e traces of the character after ;u suggest du.
This restoration is not quite certain. One sign is wanting at
the beginning of the word; the traces of the two signs with which
it concludes suggest the reading -ma-ai. For the meaning of
Su~animumu,cf. I1 R, pl. z r , col. iv, I. 1 8 , fu-&a,n-mu-mu (not
!u-ganz-mu-mu as H-W-B., p. 640) :a u-nze (i.e. "storms"). T h e
word is peculiarly applicable to Tiamat.
T h e traces seem to me to be those of z), but kal is possible.
I think the signs are clearly &-fa,and not ii; if the reading
were li, the restoration [sukl-kal-li-yz~-un
would be possible.

But T[iamat and Apsti] ' were (still) in confusion[ .
],
23. They were troubled and [ . . . . . . .
24. Indisorder(?)
[ . . . . . . . .
2 5 . A p s i was not diminished in might [ .
]
26. And Tiamat roared4[ . . . . . . . . .
27. She smote, and their deeds [ . . . . . . 1
28. Their way was evil .
[ . ] . . . .
29. Then Apsfi, the begetter of the great gods,
30. Cried unto Mummu, his minister, and said unto
him :
31. " 0 Mummu, thou minister that rejoicest my spirit,
32. '' Come, unto Tiamat let us [go] l3 ! "
33. S o they went and before Tiamat they lay down,
34. They consulted on a plan with regard to the gods
[their son^].'^
35. Apsii opened his mouth [and spake],

22.

.

I
1

I

' The sign upon No. 36,726 may be a carelessly written ti; we
can hardly read TIL-TIL (cf. Briinnow, No. 1 , s ~ ~ )T.h e text is
taken from a practice-tablet, and several of the characters upon it
are roughly made.
The reading of ta as' for ga me is also possible.
NO. 36,726, u L M ~ - ~ m - m ~ .
'O No. 36,726, suk-kal-lu ; 81-7-q,
80, sukkallzl.
" 8,-7-27, 80, riS.
No. 36,726, Ta-a-me-fi; 81-7-27, 80,
. . . . 1.
l3 Conjectural restoration.
T h e end of the line should perhaps
be restored as i ni-[il-Zik n i - i - n i l ; in any case the line must have
run over upon the edge of the tablet No. 36,726.
l4 81-7-27, 80, bud-me;.
" NO. 36,726, Ta-a-ma-tz:
Ie The restoration of this and the follow in^ line is conjectur;il.

8

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

36. a-na [Tli-amjat] el-Zi-tu-ma i - za[h - hay

.

a - ma - turn]'

. .

.

. 1
37.inz-[
. . . 1
al-hat-su-n[u
38. ur-[Y]UZa iu-up-A-ha-aha mu S i [la jal- Za - ah]

-

39. Zu-US-&aZ-Zib-ma
al-hat-su-nu Zu

i-i

40. Ku-u-lu "2-fa-Kin-ma

- [ . . . . . . 1
- is - Zal [ni - z - nil '

[Se - mi - Sa]
41. T i - ainat
an - ni - ta
i - fza
4 z . i - z u - u z - m a g i l - t a - s i e - l i - [tala
.
]
43. [ . ] mar-si-is" ug-[
] e-[
. . . .
1
44. Z i mut t a n
it - ta - di a-na [Apszi i-zak-har]l a
us'] l3
45. [ m i ] na - a
ni - i nu fa nni - i [ p - pu
46. [a]Z-hat-su-IZU
Zu iu~u.ru-sa-at-ma i ni-[is-ZaZ ni-i-nilL4

-

.

-

-

..
-

.

. .

.
. .

-

ma - a(- [ Z i - ku]
47. [i]-$u-nZ-ma""Mu-nrz-mu Apszi '"'6
48. [ . . . ] u'o Za ma-gi-ru" nzi - Zih Mu-[unz-mu

(?)I

' This line is conjecturally restored.
81-7-27, 80, [iu-up]-{u-ha-ku.
T h e end of the line obviously contained some parallel phrase
to la Ju-up-Ju-ha-ak ; this has been restored from 1. 50.
On No. 4 5 , ~ ~ 8etc.,
, there are traces of the character which
follows lu ; it does not seem to be US.
K. 3,938 and 81-7-27, 80, ku-lu.
i i s omitted by 81-7-27, 80.
For this restoration, see 11. 96, loo, and roz.
Cf. Tablet IV, 1. 87.
a K. 3,938 reads [el-zis-m[a].
' O For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, 1. 89, and Tablet 111, 1. 125.
No. 36,688, ti.

"

TI1E PLOT AGAINST THE GODS.

9

36. And unto Tiamat, the glistening one, he addressed
[the word] ' :
37. " [
. . . ]their way [ . . . . 1,
38. " By day I cannot rest, by night [I cannot lie
down (in p e a ~ e ) ] . ~
39. " But I will destroy their way, I will [ . . . 1,
40. " Let there be lamentation, and let us lie down
(again in peace)."
41. When Tiamat [heard]& these words,
42. She raged and cried aloud [ . . . . 1.
43. [She . .
] grievously [ . . . . 1,
44. She uttered a curse, and unto [Apsii she spake]'' :
4 j. " What then shall we [do] IS ?
46. " Let their way be made difficult, and let us [lie
down (again) in peace]b4 "
47. Mummu answered, and gave counsel unto Apsii,
48. [ . . . ] and'' hostile (to the gods) was the
counsel Mu[mmu gave] la :

.

.

La Conjecturally restored; another possible restoration is a - n u
[ i h i m61E~"a],i.e., "She uttered a curse against [the gods,
her sons]."
'3 T h e line is conjecturally restored.
For the restoration, cf. 1. 40, and p. 8, note 7.
"
'0.
45,528, etc., Ap-[ . . . 1.
l6 T h e traces upon 81-7-27,
80 suggest the copula u before l a ;
the first word of the line was probably another adj. descriptive of
Mummu's counsel.
" No. 46,803,ra.
T h e restoration Mu-[um-mu] is not certain, as in 1. 47 on
81-7-27, 80 the name is written with the determinative.

CkEATION SERIES, TABLET I.

10

5 0 [UY-?]is' Lu S[u]p-fu-ha-at mu - i i S lu ;al

52.

Liml3-ni-e-ti ik-pu-du a-nu

[jiz

5 3 [ .
54. [ . .

. . .

]

. -u]S7-[ . . .

- La - [at]

ilani5 m[a]6-ri-e-sVu

.

i-te-div
hi- [
]
] bir-ha-a-Aiil [i]-niz-J'a-+z~~
fa-a-s"u

55. [eli L i f ? 6 - n i - e - f i ] 3 i k - p u - d u 6u-[ulh-ri-Sziil-nu
56. [

. . . . . .

57.[
58. hu

- l[u

] .r i .Su .nlr

U S - tan - nu

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

,

. .

,

Sa - ku -

~ 7 1 2 1 9- 711i

- ir

-

7zi

1-Lu
us'. 6u

' This passage is very broken, but the sign is possibly ' ; it is
probably not ma, as Jensen suggests. I n the folloiving line ihc
reading of s'[u]p-{u-Ea-at upon 81-7-27, 80 is certain; and the
precatives are to he taken as in the z m. s., not the 3 f. s. T h e
parallelism of this passage with I. 38, moreover, proves that mziil-Sit
is to be rendered " b y night," not "liire the night"; and the
expression cannot therefore he cited as proving that it was the
creation of light which caused the revolt of Apsi~. For a further
discussion of this point and of the suggested reading of in2 ma
a$-ru-nim-ma in 1. l o g , see the Introduction.
T h e last sign of the line preserved by 81-7-27, 80 is either
e or un. I f e , it is to he identified with the e of No. 46,803, and the
preceding word must he read as al-ka-s[u]; to read aZ-ha-(a] is
consistent with the traces upon the tablet, but is hardly probable.

49.

50.

5 I.
52.

53.
54.

55.
56.

57.

Come, thelr way is strong, but thou shalt
destroy [it] ;
" Then by day shalt thou have rest, by night
shalt thou lie down (in peace)."
Apsu [hearkened unto] him and his countenance
grew bright,
[Since] he (i.e. Mummu) planned evil against the
gods his sons.
[ . . . . ] he was afraid [ . . . . I1
His knees [became weak(?)], they gave way
beneath him,
[Because of the evil]' which their first-born had
planned.
[ .
] their [ . . . 1 they altered(?).
[ . . . . . . . . ] they [ .
1,
Lamentation [ .
] they sat in [sorrow] "
"

58.
59. [

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1

'O

Conjectural restoration.
No. 46,803, mi.
T h e traces on No. 46,803 suggest the reading [ilZni]"'.
This seems to be the reading of No. 46,803.
No. 46,803, Obv., 1. 8, contains 11. 53 and 54 of the text, and
the division-mark is not preserved; the sign [uls' may therefore
belong to the second half of I. 53.
81-7-27, 80 reads u(?)-na-af-5a[b
I11 I<. 3,056,
' col. i b (last three lines), a verb nu-fa-ku forms a group with nadC
and makiitu; cf. also H-W-B., p. 486, col. a.
Cf. Tablet 11, 1. 6.
"I.
59 formed the first half of 1. I I of the Obverse of
No. 46,803, but none of it has been preserved. T h e scribe of
Nos. 4b,803 and 93,015 has written several couplets of the text in
single lines on his tablet.

'

. . . 1.

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

12

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

[
[
[
[
[
[

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
.

.

K]i
]-tee;

il-ku S u ( ? ) - t ~ ~ - rfa-a-fu
u~
Sa Kit-tu Kit-[

.

el-lum

]

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
] kzl-u-ru
. . . . . . ] Ku-tal-la [ .
.
]
67. [ . . . . ma:m
[Lines 68-82 are wanting.]

83. [
85. [
86. [
87.[
85. [
89. [
go. [
91. [

. . . . . . . r ] a 84. [ . . . - a ] m - m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . I "" '4 - 7ZullZ

.

nzu

-

tir

i ] . m i l - li

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . la
.
1-ga-am-~ua9 i-dal-la&'O ""Ti-amnt
. . . . . . . . . . ] i - du - u l - [li]11

. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .

]

]

da - a - r i - s'a~u
l
mzlt - turn

-

' T h e reading [6]a-[j.]tiis not quite certain ; there are traces of
only two signs.
T h e word meku occurs again in Tablet 11, I. 8 1 (rite-ku-zi:
Ti-a-ma-fi), and Tablet IV, 1. 66 ({a "'Ki~-gzr . . . .
me-ki-{u), and from the context of these passages it is clear that
the word describes an act or state capable of inspiring terror.
I 1 R, pl. 36, No. 3, Obv., 1. 49 f., explains the group [II]A-SAL as
me-ku-u ;a KA (i.e. pzl or Jinnr~),and a following group as " ditto "
(i.e. me-ku-u) ba amiii. If we may connect this me ilr~-u with
tire meku in the passages quoted above, we may perhaps assign to
it some such meaning as "muttering, growling, snarling.'' I t is
probable that Apsii. Mumrnu, and Icingu, as well as Tiamat, were
conceived as monsters and not endowed with human forms.

E A LEARNS THE PLOT.

I3

60. Then Ea, who linoweth all that [is],' went up and

he beheld their m ~ t t e r i n g . ~
61
62.
6 3
64.
6 5
66.

.r.

[

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . l3
] .
] .

. . .
. . . . . . [ . . . I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I"

. r .

[

. . . . ] .
. . . . . . ]

. [ .

[

his pure incantation

[
67. [

.

] misery

. . . . . . I"

[Lines 68-82 are wanting.]

. . . . ] 84.[
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .

8 3 . r . .
85. [
86. [
87.[
88. [

.

89. [

[
91. [
go.

. . . .
. . . .

. . . .

. . . . I . .
. ] the god Anu,
. an avenlger.'
. . . . . l8

] and9 he shall confound Tiamat.Io
. . . . ] h e . . . . . ,I1
. . . . . . . ] for ever.
. . . . . . ] the evil,

No. 46,803, Obv., I. 12, contained 11. 61 and 62 of the text.
LI. 62 ff. are so broken that the reading of the signs which are
preserved is not certain.
No. 46,803, Obv., 1. 14, contained 11. 64 and 65 of the text.
I t is probable that No. 46,803, Obv., 1. 15, contained 11. 66 and
67 of the text.
' Conjectural restoration ; the reading of gi is not certain.
No. 46,803, Rev., 1. 5. contained 11. 87 and 88 of the text.
Perhaps read a-ga-am-ma, "swamp " ; but the a is not certain.
'O Tiamat is possibly the subject of the verb.
" I t is possible that the verb in Tablet IV, 11. 63 and 64, should
be transliterated l'dul-ZU-&L,and connected with the verb in the
present passage and with fa-du-ul-I[i]in 1. 99.

14

CKEATION SERIES, TABLET I.

92. [ . . . . . . . . .
93. [ . . . . . . . . ]
9 4 . [ . . . . . 1-hi-ma
95. [ . . . . . . . . ]
96. [ .
.
. ]
97. [ . . . . . . . . ]
98. [ ... 1-Su u ""Mu-urn-mu
99. [

[
[
102. [
103. [
104, [
105. [
100.
IOI.

. . . . . ]- h i - i

. . . .
. . . .

. .]

tur-?a iz-zah-hay1
1-ha-hi i-na-ru-nza
&a- i
is"
us"- 6 u 2
fa3
pu
I
tu7n
uZ ni-:a- aZ-lnl n i - i - x i
Ap-suu bar-6a-[ . . l 4
;a zh-ha-mu-u ina su-[ . . ]

[

. .

-

-

-

-

WZ .

I[i]
. . . ] i n i .is - la2 z i - i .[nil 8
. . ] [/1]~-[~1]~n-n?u-m9
e-nu-fu-u-[.. ]I0
] i n -i -l
ni - i - [ ~ z z ]
. . . ] gz-mil-la-&nu fir-ri-[ . . 1"
. . . ] a-na za-hi-hzb f i ~ - z ~ h -. [. .]
. . . ] lZ a-[mla-turn i
el-[lu]
a

du

. . . . . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .

' T h e speech that follows is evidently addressed to Tiamat.
T h e speaker refers to the evil fate which has overtaken Apsfi and
Mummn in their revolt against the gods (cf. 11. 97 and 98); he
,
by
encourages Tiamat to take vengeance for them (1. I O ~ )and,
continuing the struggle, to obtain with him the slothful peace
From the fact that Tiamat subwhich she desires (11. loo ff.).
sequently promoted Kingu to lead her forces " because he had
given her support" (cf. 1. 1z7), and addressed him as her "chosen
spouse," it may be inferred that the speaker of 11. 93 ff. was Iiingu.
a 8z-9-18, 6,879, tu-us'-[ . . . 1.
No. 46,803 also reads $a, preceded by traces of another sign.
W n e sign is wanting at the end of the line, perhaps ma.
No. 46,803, Rev., 1. 14, contains 11. 97 and 98 of the text. I t is
possible that I. 98 begins with the words u '"'Mu-urn-mu,in which
case ;u (or ku) would form the last sign of line 97. Elsewhere on
the tablet, however, the scribe has not omitted the division-signs
when writing two lines of the text together; cf. No. 46,803, Obv.,
11. 9 and ro. I t is safer to assume that no part of 1. 98 has been
preserved b y No. 46,803.

THE FATE OF A P S ~A N D MUMMU.

Is

92. [ . . . . . . 1 . . . he spake: '
93. " [ . . . ] thy [ . . ] he hath conquered and
94. " [ . . . ] he [weepeth] and sitteth in tribulation(?).
95. " [ . . . . . . . . . . . ] of fear,
96. " [ .
] we shall not lie down (in peace).
97. " [ . . . . . . ] Apsii is laid waste (?),4
98. " [ .
.] and Mummu, who were taken captive,
i n l . . . 1.
99. " [ .
] .
thou didst . . . ,7
100. " [ . . . . . ] let us lie down (in peace).
IOI.
[ . . . . ] . . . they will smite (?) [ . . . 1.
1 0 2 . " [ . . . . . ] let us lie down (in peace).
103. " [ . . . ] thou shalt take vengeance for them,
104. " [ . . . ] unto the tempest shalt thou [ . . . ] ! "
105. [And Tiamat hearkened unto]" the word of the
bright god, (and said) :
-

-

-

82-9-18, 6,879 gives a variant reading for the second half of
the line : la e-di; ina ma-a-[ . . . 1.
' Cf. 1. 89, and p. 13, note I I .
82-9-18, 6,879 gives a variant reading for the second half of
the line: uI(-)ta-TU-mi(-)na[ . . . 1.
T h e first two signs of the word are not quite certain.
'"8zg-r8,
6,879, i-na-tu-u-[
1.
T h e word should probably be restored as tzi.ri[z'],or tir-ri-[ma].
T h e first half of the line may possibly he restored as [zs-me-ma
Ti-amat], as suggested in the translation; or [ib-du-ma Ti-amat
a-nu], cf. Tablet 11, I. (113). According to this interpretation the
speech of the god (Icingu) ends with 1. 104, Tiamat replies in
I. 106, and with I. 107 the narrative begins the description of
Tiamat's preparations for battle. I t is possible that the speech
does not end with I. 104, but continues to 1. 106; in that case
I. 106 may be restored in some such way a s "[The leadership of
the gods unto me] shalt thou entrust," and for a-[mla-turn in
1. '05 we should perhaps read a-[bla-turn. T h e former interpretation seems to me preferable, as it assigns a line to Tiamat in
which she assents to Kingu's proposals.

. . .

16

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

109. [im-ma-a$-ru - nim - ma] i-du-us' Ti-anzat ti-bi-[u-nil3
110.

[zi-zu Kap,du La sa-hi-pu] ?nu

I I I.

[ua - i u - u

- Sa

u

[im

- ma]

-

I 12.

tam - &a r ] a na - zar - bu-bu Za- [ab-bu]
[uizken-na Sit-&u-nu]-ma i - baiz - n u - u su-L[a-a-ti]

"3.

[U7n

"4.

[US-rad-dikalh-hu la ma&-ru it-t[a-l]nd

- mu

-

Hu

" 5 . [zak - tu - ma
I

IG. [im-tu

hi-ma]

-

6u]r4 p a - t i - k a - a t

-

i i ] n n i La

pa-d[u-u]

ha-l[a-ma]
si~ma/ja[*~]
at-ta-['-i]

da-mu zu-mur-[fu-nu]US-nza-a[-[&]

I I 7.

[us'unzgaLl2*q nu-ad-ru-turn pu-uGha-[a]-tiu-SaZ-[hi;-ma]

I 18.

[me-lam-m]e ui-dai-ia-a i - Z i - i f 5 [urn tas' - s'il]

-

-

-

-

19. [a-mi]?-Su-nu Sar- ba ba [I]iS
&[a? - m i
im]
120. [xu]-mur-&-nuZiS-ta&&i-dam-ma la i-ni-'-u [i-rat-su-un]

I

' We

may perhaps restore the end of the line as i xi-$u-uS

[{a-a;-ma] ; cf. Tahlet IV, 1. 86.
T h e word may possibly be restored as 6a-ni-[af].
Lines 109-142have been restored from Tahlet 111, 11. 13-52.
A title of Tiamat.
I n the parallel passages the majority of the duplicates read eli;,
not ili;, which precludes the translation "she made them even as

I7

TIAMAT PREPARES FOR BATTLE.

106. " [ . . . ] shalt thou entrust ! let us wage [war] ! "'
107. [ . . . . ] the gods in the midst of [ . . . ]
108. [ . . . . . ] for the gods did she create.'
109. [They banded themselves together and] at the
side of Tiamat [they] advanced ;
I 10. [They were furious, they devised mischief without
resting] night and [day].
I I I . [They prepared for battle], fuming and raging ;
I I 2. [They joined their forces] and made war.
I 13. [Ummu-fjub~lr,~
who formed all things,
"4. [Made in addition] weapons invincible, she
spawned monster-serpents,
I 15. [Sharp of] tooth, and merciless of fang ;
I 16. [With poison instead of] blood she filled [their]
bodies.
"7. Fierce [monster-vipers] she clothed with terror,
I 18. [With splendour] she decked them, [she made
them] of lofty s t a t ~ r e . ~
I I 9. [Whoever beheld] them, terror overcame him,"
1 2 0 . Their bodies reared up and none could withstand
[their attack].
gods." The same variety of reading occurs in a parallel expression
in I V R , pl. 60% [67], B, Obv., 1. 31, and C, Ohv., 1. 1 1 , /a-nad a a - t i k r n ' e-lis' (so B ; C, i-12) u-ma;-:il, " I have made the
honour of the Iring to be exalted."
No. 45,528, etc., Say-ba-bi-i: li-ik-&Lay-nzzlini], " h e was
overcome by terror," or possibly, "his terror overcame him" ;
of the two I think it preferable to assign a passive meaning to
Ii-ih-bar-mi-im and to take 3ar-ba-62'-i: as an adverb.
Z

18

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

1 2 3 [u-m]eda-ab-ru-te%nnn-mdu
124. [nu-S]i/rak-hu la pa-du-u

u

hu

-

[sa - rik

- -

- ku] '
-

[ f a - 4a zi]

la a d i ru

128. ~-Sa.aJ'-hi~~'~"Kin-gn
ina 6i-ri-Su-nu fa-a-![u u!-rab-6t-2]
129. a - l i - ~ u t ~ ~ a / i - r i ' 5 p a - a ~ z ~ ~ ~ ~ n - ~ a - n i ~ n ~ - ' - i ~ - ~ ~ - [ ~ ~ t p ~ / i ~ i ] 1 '
130. [nu]-ailskakku ti-i;-bu-tz~'g te-bu-[u] a na - [an- tu]

-

' No. 45,528,

etc., [us'-aiz-m]a,or [US-zi-;]a.
I n the list of monsters created by Tiamat, both here and in the
parallel passages, it is probable that the words which occur in the
singular are used collectively.
I n I1 R, pl. 6, col. i, 1. 26, CUR]-RE is explained as kal-6u
fe-gu-u, "raging bound " ; the reading of the ideogram is not
certain.
No. 45,528, etc., inserts u.
NO. 45,528. etc., fum.
Restored from Tablet 11, 1. 2 9 ; No. 45,528, ctc., BI (or
GUD, but not ku)[
. 1.
No. 93,015, [alp-pu-na.a-h.
No. 93,015, e!-ri-e-fi
No. 45.528, etc., ki-ma.
'O That is, eleven kinds of monsters; since the plural is used in
a

. .

[She set] up vipers,' and dragons, and the
(monster) [Lal?amu],
1 2 2 . [And hurricanes],
and raging hound^,^ and
scorpion-men,
1 2 3 . And mighty
[tempests], and fish-men, and
[rams] ;
- 1 2 4 . [They bore] cruel weapons, without fear of [the
fight].
1 2 5 . Her commands [were mighty], [none] could
resist thetn ;
1 2 6 . After this fashion, huge of stature, [she made]
eleven (monsters)."
127. Among the gods who were her1' sons, inasmuch
as he had given [her support],
128. She exalted Kingu; in their midst [she raised]
him [to power].
1 2 9 . T o march before the forces, to lead [the host],
I 30. T o give the battle-signal, to advance to the attack,
121.

the case of many of the classes, it is clear that Tiamat created more
than one of each.
" No. 45,528, etc., [iZdni]Sd.
" No. 93,or j , bu-uk-ri-Su-nu, i.e. the sons of Apsii and Tiamat.
l 3 Nos. 45.528, etc., and 93,015, #a.
l4 No. 93,01j. -ku-tu; No. 4 j , j z 8 , etc., [
. . -k]u-[ . . . I.
No. 45,528, etc., [mla-ah-ra; No. 93,015, mahri.
l6 Nos. 45.528, etc., and 93,ol j , p a - n i .
" No. 93,015, urn-ma-nu mu-'-ir-ru-tupu-u[b-ri].
K . 3,938, nu-&; No. 45,528, etc., na-{e.
I N No. 45.528, etc., te-is-6u-turn.
81-7-27, 80 reads di-ku-u, " t o summon to the atlack."

.

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

20

131. i u - u d
t a r n - / i n - n i l m - a b s"ih - k a - t ~ ~ - t z i ~
132. z) - &id-ma ka - (us'- Su3 u-ie-Si-ba-a5-Su i~za[bar-rz]
133. ad-di4 t a - a - h ~ina $u/zui5 ilzni*'"

I 38.

ha-ta l4 hibit-ha La in-nin-na.a

140 inn

iL&zi

[ma-r]i-e-s"u18 si'

Z[i-Run

- s"as;rr - bi - ha

si-it

pi-i-ha]

- ma - [m is' - t i - mu]

No. 45,528, etc., f a - a r n . 6 ~ - m ;No. 93.015, fa-am-ha-a-tn.
93,015, rub {ik-hat-tu-fu. ' No. 45,528, etc., ka-tu-[u]:-fu.
K. 3,938, a-dl'; No. 93,015 reads ICW, i.e. nddi
No. 45.528, etc., i-[nalpu-bur.
NO. 93,015. il2nz'.
No. 45.528, etc., ku-ut.
K. 3,938, i i e [ n i ] .
NO. 45,528, etc., lu-u.
"'No. 93,0'5, Zu Su-ur-6a-/a-e &a-'-a-n:
" Restored from Tablet 111, 1. 104. T h e Anunnaki are possibly
the subject of the sentence.
NO. 45,528, etc., id-din-[$]urn-ma ; No. 93,015, id-driz-ma.

' No.

K I N G U LEADS THE REBEL HOST.

21

131. T o direct the battle, to control the fight,
132. Unto him she entrusted ; in [costly raiment] she
made him sit, (saying) :
133. " I have uttered thy spell, in the assembly of the
gods I have raised thee to power.
134. " T h e dominion over all the gods [have I
entrusted unto him].
135. " Be thou exalted, thou my chosen spouse,
1 3 6 " May they magnify thy name over all [of them
. . . the Anunnalri]." 'l
137. She gave him the Tablets of Destiny, on [his]
breast she laid them, (saying) :
138. " T h y command shall not be without avail, and
[the word of thy mouth shall be establishcd]."
139. Now Kingu, (thus) exalted, having received [the
power of Anu],
140. [Decreed] the fate among the gods his sons,
(saying) :
141. " Let the opening of your mouth [quench] the
Fire-god ;
142. " Whoso is exalted in the battIe, let him [display
(his) might] ! "
-

No. 93,015, i-raL-Eu.
l4 No. 93,015, ha-a{
. . . 1.
NO. 45,528. etc., i f i - n u - a n - [ d a ; No. gj,arg, ix-na-nu.
'' 81-7-27, 80, y K i ] - i n - g u .
'' The scribe of No. 93,015 has written ma for i u hy niistake.
l8 NO.45,528, etc., a-nu ilzf~i"rnZr2*'?ucl, "for the gods his sons."
'' Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,015, pi-i-Ru-nu.
NO. 93,015, "'BIL-GI; 81-7-27, 80 and No. 45,528, '"'GG-B~R.
ina is omitted by Nos. 45,528, etc., and 93,0r5.
z2' 81-7-27,
80, r[a].

l3

"

- kab - bi[t] - 7na'

-

-

T i - a - ma - turn pi ti - i$ Su
z. [Zzm - n i - e - ti ik] 8- ta - :ray a-na iZ&zi x i ip - rz - Sn
3. [ana tn-ur gi-mil] 3-li Apszi n - Z a - z Tz-anznt
4. [ . . . -111s"~ hi-i i:-mi-da a-7za ""E-a 2)-ta-Sara
I. u

-

.

5 . [is'- me - ma]"'"E
- a a - ma - tum Su - a - tiin
6 [mar-si]-is" us"- &a- r i - i r - ma Sa-hu-um-mi-2 ztS- bu
i - ~ Z I L- hu
7. [GmP*'
u ] - r i - kn - 7na
uz - za - Su
8. [ur-ha-& aaS- r i ] - is' An-& a - bi - Su Su - u us'- tar - di
g. [il- likl-7ua

ma&- ru'

a - bi a

- Z i - d i - fu A n -Say

10. [rnir~z-?nu]-u
;ri-ainat
I I.

ik-pu-dn u-Sa-an-na-a a-na fa-a-Su
[um-ma Ti]a-anzata-Lit-ti-a-ni i - z i - i r - ra - a n - nu - a -t i

la - a6 - hat
[pa]-ub-ru&tS-ku-na-at-ma ag - g i - iS
1 3 . [ i s ] - & u - ~ - ~ i ~ i l l ~il'rilzi
- m u g i - m i - z r - & - 2172
14. [ a - d ~Sa
] at-tu-nu tab-nu-a i - da a - Sa al - & l o

12.

-

T h e beginning of I. r has been restored from the catch-line on
Tablet I, preserved by No. 45,528 f 46,614.
Conjectural restoration.
For this restoration cf. Tablet I, 1. 103.
T h e sign is possibly ta.
6 T h e rendering of this line is a little uncertain.
T h e beginning
may perhaps be restored as [pu-ufi-ru-ujd; in that case a passive
meaning must be assigned to 7)-tn-Sar, and the line translated,
"How she had collected her [forces] unto Ea was divulged."

Tiamat made weighty1 her handiwork,
2. [EvilIZshe wrought against the gods her children.
3. [To avenge] Apsii, Tiamat planned evil,
4. But how she had collected her [forces, the god
. . . . ] unto E a divulged.'
5. E a [hearkened to] this thing, and
6. H e was [grievous]ly afflicted and he sat in sorrow.
7. [The days] went by, and his anger was appeased,
8. And to [the place ofJ AnSar his father he took
[his way].
9. [He went] and standing before7 Aniar, the father
who begat him,
10. [All that] Tiamat had plotted he repeated unto him,
1 1 . [Saying, "Tilamat our mother hath conceived
a hatred for us,
1 2 . " With all her force she rag-eth, full of wrath.
13. " All the gods have turned to her,
14. " [With] those, whom ye created, they go at her
side.
I.

For zp-ta-Far we may also read ip-fa-hir,and for the object of
i!-mi-da we may perhaps restore [narkabtuli; the line may then be
translated, "But when [ .
. 1 had yoked his [chariot],
unto E a he repaired." It may be noted that not very much is
missing from the beginning of the line.
Lines 5-10 have been conjecturally restored.
Or, possibly, "addressing Anhr."
Lines I 1-19 have been restored from Tablet 111, 11. 73-81.
'O No. 38,396, al-krr.
No. 38,396, 5i-if.

. .

'

24

CREATION SERIES, TABI.ET 11.

15.

[Z1z]-ma-as-ru-ni~n-ma
i-dn-us" l'i-amat te - 6% - u

17.

[nu]-s'u-u tam-ha-ra3 nu-zar-bu-6u la-ad-6u4

18. ulzken - nu 3-hu - nu - ma

i s-ban-nu-u

19. [ U ] m- ma

pa-ti-i4-&at8

- I;Iu - 6u - u r 7

20. us"-radg-diRaR-Ru La ma&-ru1 it-ta-lad

21.

zak-tu-ma Sin-nu Zapa-du-u

at -

zz. im-tu Ri-ma da-am13 zu-vzur-Sn-nu
23.

us" -

24. me-La?~?-muus'- daS- ;a

' No.

-a

su-la-a-turn 6
ha-la-mu
sir- vza - hu

'-

ta

ufnmgalZ~*'na-ad-rzl-tipu-ul ka-a-ti ' 5

u

- nil

nza

-

- s'ul -

"

nnz l2
al

-

ln l4

his" - 7?za

i - Z i - is* urn - fa?'- si' - zl l 6

+

38,396, tc-6i-u-nu.
NO. 92,632 93,048, mu.
NO. 91,632, etc., hi.
No. 38,396, ri.
"0.
38,396, a.
NO. 92,632, etc., ti.
' No. 38,396, [Ulnz-rnzr-gu-bur.
NOS. 38,396 and 92,632, etc.,pa-fi-)a at.
lo No. 38,396, ma-ha?:
No. 38,396, ra-ad.
'I No. 92,632, etc., ~ir-ma6
; No. 38,396, ~irrnaQZ*'.
la No. 38,396, at-fa-'-u-urn; No. 92,632, etc., at-fa-'-am.
No. 38,396, da-nu ; No. 92,632, etc., da-mi.

IS.

They are banded together and at the side of
Tiamat they advance ;
" They are furious, they devise mischief without
resting night and day.
" They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ;
" They have joined their forces and are making war.
" Ummu-Hubur, who formed all things,
Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she
bath spawned monster-serpents,
" Sharp of tooth, and merciless of fang.
" With poison instead of blood she hath
filled
their bodies.
" Fierce monster-vipers she hath clothed with
terror,
" With splendour she hath decked them, she hath
made them of lofty stature.'"
" Whoever beholdeth them is overcome by terror,"
" Their bodies rear up and none can withstand
their attack.
" She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the
(monster) Lahamu,

"

16.
17.
I 8.

19.
20.

2 1.
22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

Nos. 38,396 and 92,632, etc., la.
38,396, [GAIL-BUR
nn-ad-ru-lum pu-ul-fia-a-lum.
'8 So No. 38,396; No. 92,632, etc., reads u7?z-ta-as'Si-il, and
No. 45,528 46,614, urn-iai-ti-i~( = umlaSiiZ). For the phrase
i-Zi-i;urn-fa;-fi-il, see above, p. 16 f., note 5 .
Nos. 38,396 and 92,632, etc., dam.
See above, p. 1 7 .
'* No. 38.396, i-ni-'-inz; No. gz,6jz, i-ni-'-u.
NO. 92,632, {irru;s"ZJ".
20 NO. 92,632, ya-at.
"'0.

+

"

26

CREATION SERIES, T A B L E T 11.

28. u

- gal

-

la

uR

-

BE"'

u

akrab 2

-

avzzLu

31. gab - Sa te - r i - tu - i a la ma - bar - ra fi - na - nza
32. ap-pu-nu-ma wV-ttn esV-rit hi-ma &L-a-ti24;- t d - i i
33. i-nn iLEni"

6u-uk-ri-fa Suut

iS.hu-nu-& pu-uij-ru

34. u-.in-a;-ha ""Kin-pc ina bi-ri-Su-nu Sa-a-Su uf-ra6-6i-i~"3

35. a-li-hu-utma&-mpa-nium-nza-num ~ ~ - i r - r u - i u m ~ $ u - u / z - r u ~
36. nu-6-e huh-hu ti-i:-bu-turn te-bu-u a-na-an-trim"
37. [iu - u]d7 la - a m - /za - ra ra - a6 s'ik - hat - z~ - tuvz
38. [ip-bid-m]a ha-tu-ui-Su u-$e-fi-ha-ai-Si i-na " K T - r i
39. [ad-di

ta-a]-ka

i-na

pu-bur

' For this ideogram see above, p.
a

iLaniP1

18, note 3.
No. 38,396 prefixes the determinative "'.
K. 4,832, [uS]~ra6-6i.
I<. 4.832, tu.
K. 4,83z,$u&rz'.
I<. 4,832, fr:

u-far-bi-ka

EA CARRIES THE TIDINGS TO

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

27

And hurricanes and raging hounds, and scorpionmen,
" And mighty tempests, and fish-men and rams ;
" They bear cruel weapons, without fear of the
fight.
Her commands are mighty, none can resist them ;
" After this fashion, huge of stature, hath she
made eleven (monsters).
'' Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as
he hath given her support,
" She hath exalted Kingu ; in their midst she
hath raised him to power.
" T o march before the forces, to lead the host,
" T o give the battle-signal, to advance to the
attack,
" [To direct]' the battle, to control the fight,
" U n t o him [hath she entrusted]; in costly
raiment she hath made him sit, (saying) :
" ' [I have uttered] thy [spell], in the assembly of
the gods I have raised thee to power,
" ' [The dominion over all] the gods have I
entrusted [unto thee].
" ' [Be thou exalted], thou [my chosen spouse],

' I

I'

' Lines 37-48
99-1

ANSAR.

10.

I<.4,832, [

have been restored from Tablet 111, 11. 41-52 and

. . . I-iuu-Li.

' I<. 4,8 jz, ina.

28

C R E A T I O N S E R I E S , TABLET 11.

42. [Zz-ir-tab-bu-u zik-ru-ha

44. [ha-ta hibit-ha

K

45. [in-nu-nu

46. [an
47. )z[

iZiini

- iz

La

eli haliiu-nu

in-ni~z.na-a] l i - ~ Z L I$[Gilt
Z
pii-ha

g

s'u-ui'-&u]-u

-a ]

r

$i - Ku

. . . . 1-uh-hi1

-

nu]

li-pu-a

ii - 7na - fiz
"" GibiZ

Zz

"'A-nz~-ti

is"- ti - ?/zn

- ni -

i&- ha

-

48. [nii'id ina kit - 7izn - r i ] nza - a g - s"a ra ZiS- ra6 - b i - ib

50, [
51.[
5z.[

it - t a r - ha
. . . . . . . . <a] - p a t .su
. . . . . . . . ] La n a - b a t 4 h a - ? , a s - s u
. . . . . I - & f a - g i - m a - s " u us"-tajZ-&-ah

5 3 . [ .
54 [ .

. . . . . . . 1-21
. . . . . . . ] - pu - s"u

5 5 . [ M u - u?rz

-

21zu

uI2

t u - & u - u n - t u
(
a- i
at - ta
Apse
ta - na
ra5

-

I n the parallel passage, Tablet 111, 1. roq, No. 93,017 reads at
the end of the line '"'A-nun-na-hi. This is in favour of Jensen's
suggestion that the present passage should be restored as '"'E-nu]uh-hi; cf. the list of gods, K. 2,100 (published by Beaold, P.S.B.A.,
"01. xi, March, I 889), col. iv, 1. 8, which explains ""E-nu-uk-hi as

"'A-nun-na-[hi].
Conjectural restoration.
For the first half of the line Delitzsch suggests the restoration
siinju linhastna, " he smote his loins."

42. " ' [May they magnify thy name over all of
them .
] . . .'I
43. " [She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny, on
his breast she] laid them, (saying) :
44. " '[Thy command shall not be without avail], and
the [word] of thy mouth shall be established.'
45. " [Now Kingu, (thus) exalted], having received
the power of Anu,
46. " Decreed the fate [for the gods, her sons],
(saying) :
47. " ' Let [the opening of your mouth] quench the
Fire-god ;
48. " ' [Whoso is exalted in the battle], let him display
(his) might ! ' "
49. [When An5ar heard how Tiamatl2 was mightily
in revolt,
50. [ . . . . . . . .
he bit his lips,
51. [ . . . . . 1, h i s m i n d w a s n o t a t p e a c e ,
5 2 . His [ .
1, he made a bitter lamentation :
53. " [ . . . . . . . . . . . . ] battle,
54. " [ . . . . . . . ] thou . . . .
55. " [Mummu and] ' Apsii thou hast mitten,^
The reading bat is certain.
ta-nu-ra I take as the Pret., not the Pres. From 11. 93 ff. of the
First Tablet it may be inferred that ApsI3 was conquered before
Tiamat made her preparations for battle. I t is clear, therefore, that
in the present passage fa-nu-ra is to be taken as the Pret. and not
as the Pres. ; and, as AnSar is addressing Ea, it may be concluded
that E a was the conqueror of Apsi~. In accordance with this conclusion is the fact that it was the god E a who first discovered the
conspiracy of Apsi~and Tiamat (see Tablet I, I. 60).

3O

CREATION SERIES, TABLET 11.

56; [Ti-amat u - f a . as'-ki ""Kin]- g u a -

f?za-&ar-&

[A gap of allout ten lines occx~rshere.]

(69) [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ] - la
(70) [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ] - n i
(71) [ . . . . . ] z i i;[ .
. 1-si
(72) ['"LAn-s"ar anal
ma-ri-s'u
[a-ma-tu i]-zak-kar
(73) [ . . . . a]n - nu - n ka - s'u - [Su] kar - ra .d i
(74) [ f a &-&-a
e-mu]-ka-a-fu fa iua-&av te-bu-iu
(75) [al- ham] - ma nut - tis' T i - anzat i - ziz - za at - ta
(76) [ . . . . l 4 ka6-ta-ins" Zi6-6u-us" lip-pu-nSv
(77) [{urn - ma - ma]
La
s"e - ma - ta
a - mat - ha
(78) [a - ma - t ] u - n i at - lne - fi1n - ??za ii - i Lz) -pa -as'- &a
(79) [is' - me - el - ma zik - ri a6i - i u A n - &r
(80) [us'- te - f i r hurl-ra-an-fa-ma u-ru-u&-ia UJ"- tar - di

' I think there is no doubt a-Zi should be take; as the adv.
"where ? " T h e beginning of the line is conjecturally restored.
The reading of Nudimmud at the end of the line is certain.
Before the determinative the sign AN is visible.
T h e numbers of the lines, when conjectural, are enclosed
within parentheses.

'

5.6. " [But Tiamat hath exalted Kinlgu, and where1 is
one who can oppose her ? "
57. [ . . . . . . . . . . . ] deliberation
58. [ . . . . the .
of ] the gods, N[u]di[mmud] '
[ A gap of al~outten lines occurs here.]

(69)3 [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
(70) [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
(71)[ . . . . . I . . . [ . . . . . I
(72) [Aniar unto] his son addressed [the word] :
(73) " [ . . . . ] . . . my mighty hero,
(74) " [Whose] strength [is great] and whose onslaught
cannot be withstood,
(75) " [Go] and stand before Tiamat,
(76) " [That] her spirit [may be a p p e a ~ e d ] ,that
~ her
heart may be merciful.
(77) " [But if] she will not hearlien unto thy word,
(78) " Our [word] shalt thou speak unto her, that she
may be pacified."
(79) [He heard the] word of his father Anjar
(80) And [he directed] his path to her, towards her he
took the way.
(81) Anu [drew nigh],= he beheld the muttering' of
Tiamat,
T h e first part of the line probably contained some such phrase
as Zi8-pa-ab-s'ir, as suggested in the translation.
T h e sense of the couplet seems to be that, should Tiamat not
listen to Anu, she might perhaps respect the authority of AnSar.
For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, I. 65.
' See above, p. 1 2 , note z.

3 7,

CREATION SERIES, TABLET 11.

(82)

[nZ i - li - ' - a

(83) [
(84) [
(85) [

ma

- &av- fa] 1 i - n

- a

ar - Rii"

. . . . . . . . . . . . . ] - f u A12 - Snr
. . . . . . . i ] - zak - kar - Su
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e]/i - ia
[A gnp of about twenty lines occurs here.]

[ . . .
(105) [ . . .
(106) [ . . .
(107) [ . . .
(108) [ . . .
(109) [ . . .
( I 10) at - ta ma

(104)

-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
. . mu - tir] g i - 7uiL - /U a - [ . . ]
. . . . . . . . . . ] bar .[dn]
. . . . . ] a .a pi - ris - ti - f [ u ]
. . . . . . . . . ] i-ta-7?zi4-fn
. . . . . . . . . . . . ] abi .Ra
wza - ri

VZM

- nap - pi - fu W i h - bi - Sn

i b - d z ~ - ? n a 6e-/urn a - n a a - n z a - t u r n a - h i - f u
(114) i t - h i - e - m a i t - t a - z i - i z ma-/1a-ri-is"'0 An-Jar
( I I 5) i-mu+-fn-~naAn-far lib-ba-fu fn-nh-ha-a-ti im-/a I'
(113)

' This line has been restored from Tablet 111, 1. 5 3 .
T h e last word of the line may possibly be restored as n - [ n a - k u ] ,
in which case the line would form part of a speech of Marduk to
AnHar.
This restoration is not certain.
K. 4,832, me.
Literally, "who maketh broad his heart"; cf. I. 7 1 , lib-6u-us'
li$-pu-u;, '"hat her heart may be merciful." T h e phrase, as
applied to Marduk, implies that he shows mercy on the gods by

'

(82) [But he could not withstand her], and he turned

back.
(83) [ . . . . . . . . . . . ] AnSar
(84) [ . . . . . . . . ] he spake unto him :
(85) " [ . . . . . . . . . . . ] upon me
[A gap of about twenty lines occurs here.]

(104)[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ]
(105) [ . . . . . . 1 an avenger [ . . . ]
(106) [ . . . . . . . . . . . ] vajliant]
(107) [ . . . . . 1 in the place of his decision
(108) [ . . . . . . . ] he spake unto him :
(log) " [ . . . . . . . . . . ] thy father
( I 10) " Thou art my son, who maketh merciful his
heart.
] to the battle shalt thou draw nigh,
( II I ) " [ .
( I 12) " [ . . . ] he that shall behold thee shall have
peace."
("3) And the lord rejoiced at the word of his father,
( I 14) And he drew nigh and stood before Angar.
( I I S ) AnSar beheld him and his heart was filled with
joy,
consenting to become their avenger. This seems to me preferable
to my previous translation, " who malreth valiant his heart "
(cf. Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. 4, note).
K. 4,832, hi?.
NO. 40, j 59, ti-hi-ma.
K. 4,832, [
1-uk.
a No. 4 o r j j 9 , ni-i-hi; K. 4,832, ni-ib-ha.
lo K. 4,832, and Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, etc., 4.
" Nos. 40,559 and 92,632, etc., lu-u6-6n-faiv-fi.

. . .

34

(117)

CREATION SERIES, TABLET 11.

[ a - b i I 3 la

( I IS) Lu

- u l - Lih - Inn

lu - i n - a17z -

(120)

[Zu - u l - l i ] h - ma

(121)

ai-u

(123)

[ .

(124)

hi-fa-ad

(125)

[

(126)

[ h i - f a - a d ] Ti-amat

.

zik-ri

. .
.

.

.&-ti4 s h - a p - t u - u k "

iuk-tu-mat

-a

Lu - s"n - a ? l z - ~ a - a nza-la
ta-/in-za-fu

-

]I2
nu - u
$ i -d i
Ti-amat ur-1.u-&is"

.

]I2

ilza - la

-nu

-u

hi- di

u - i s "

Lib-hi-ha

lib-bi-ka'

u-s"e-{i-ha8

Ju

u

- Li-

ta-hab-ha-as
u

fu

ill3

at-ta

- Li-zL'3

ta-Lab-ha-as

at.tn

' Nos. 40,559 and 9 2 , 6 3 2 , etc., .Fa-up.
No. 40,559, SU.
Conjectural restoration; the traces o f the second sign in the
line on No. 38,396 may he those o f bi or Say.
No. 40,G9,ji-fn.
"0s. 40,559 and 9 2 , 6 3 2 , Jap-tu-uk; R. 4,832, Eap-Luk.
Coniectural restoration: for a somewhat similar change
o f one
"
word when a couplet is repeated, see Tablet IV, 11. 3-6.
' I t is clear that at this point Blardok ceases to speak, and that
Angar's answer begins with the following line.
Literally, " O f what man has his battle caused thee to go
a

M A K D U K CONSENTS TO FIGHT TIAMAT.

35

16) H e kissed him on the lips and his fear departed
from him.
("7) " [O my father],3 let not the word of thy lips
be overcome,
(118) " Let me go, that I may accotnplish all that is
in thy heart.
let not the word of thy lips be
( 1 1 9 ) " [0
overcome,
( 1 2 0 ) " [Let me] go, that I may accomplish all that is
in thy heart." '
(121) " What man is it, who hath brought thee forth
to battle ?
( 1 2 2 ) " [ . . . ] Tiamat, who is a woman, is arnlecl
and attaclieth thee."
( 1 2 3 ) " [ . . . ] . . rejoice and be glad; ''
(124) " T h e neck of Tiamat shalt thou swiftly trample
under foot.
(125) " [ . . . ] .
. rej~iceandbeglad;'~
(126) " [The neck] of Tiamat shalt thou swiftly
trample under foot.
(I

forth!'
No. 40,559 reads u-ie-$ma ; according to this reading it
is possible to take zik-n. as the subject, and fa-ha-za-Iu as the
object, of the verb.
No. 40,559, [a ~ i - i n - x i - b a t .
'O iu-ar-ka I take as the Pres. Kal. from Eru, followed by the
direct accusative.
" K. 4,832, ina kailki.
la It is possible that the first word of the line should he restored
[li-i6-6al-nu-u, in which case hi-di and s'u-li-il must be taken as
substantives, "let there he joy and gladness."
l 3 I<. 4,832, lil.

36

CREATION SERIES, TABLET 11.

-

n8 - nu
[?nu]- r i
vzu dn - u
gign - 7.i
(128) [ E - a r n a l t S n - u p - s V i - z & i - n a t e - e - h a 2 el-Zu3
."
( I 29) [UY - ha ha]
ur - ru - k i - 2.7
Su - tav - di - ma
(130) [ .
. ] kz ut-tak-ha4 Su-te-e-ri-r-ha-nis"
( I 27)

. .

( 1 3 1 ) [ i & - d ] u - 7 n [ abje-l11m a - n u 6 a - m a t a - 6 i - h
( I 32) [el-Zi-i;
lib-ba-Sn-u-nza a-na
a-bi-&
7-zak-har
( I 33) be lu7n
iZanis
Si - mat
ilZnilo
mhilti*'
( I 34) s"ni?z ma - ma ana - hu nzrt - tir gi-miZ- Li - 2%- nn
(135) a-ham-me Ti-amat-ma" CL - baZ- krt ha - a - i n - un
(136);uk-na.+na pn-n&-~a Su-te-ra
i-ba-a
Sim-ti1%

-

-

(138) +-Sn ppia hi-ma ha-tz~-nu-~na'~
si'-nza t a ' V u - A - i m

' K. 4,832, [gi-mlir:

No. 38,396, inu fe-e-kz:
I(: 4,832, el-li.
ut-tak-kn is possibly Pres. Iftaal from nuke, or Pres. Pie1 from
rnpu,with (or without) the z m. S. pron. suffix:if the former, the
beginning of the line !nay perhaps be restored as [da-mi-ha], as
suggested in the translation.
' K. 4,832, [ . . - i ] r ; No. 92,632, { [ a - . . . 1.
' I<. 4,832 seems to have read [inla.
' K. 4.832, ah-Su.
NO. 40,559, [ilZ!~i]*'.

.

( 1 2 7 ) " 0 my [son], who knoweth all wisdom,
(128) " Pacify [Tiamalt with thy pure incantation.
( I zg) " Speedily set out upon thy way,
( 1 3 0 ) " For [thy blood
shall not be poured out,4
thou shalt return again."
( 1 3 1 ) T h e lord rejoiced at the word of his father,
( 1 3 2 ) His heart exulted, and unto his father he spalre :
( 1 3 3 ) " 0 Lord of the gods, Destiny of the great gods,
( 1 3 4 ) " If I, your avenger,
( 1 3 5 ) " Conquer Tiamat and give you life,
( 1 3 6 ) " Appoint an assembly, make my fate preeminent and proclaim it.''
( 1 3 7 ) " In UpSukkinaku seat yourselves joyfully
together,
(138) " With my word in place of you will I decree
fate.
( 1 3 9 ) " May whatsoever I do remain unaltered,
(iqo) " May the word of my lips never be changed
nor made of no avail."

(?)I

40,559, dimal*.
' O K. 4 , 8 3 2 and No. 4 0 , 5 5 9 , 'Wnr"'.
No. 40,559, [T]i-amai-am-ma.
' a In No. 4 0 , 5 5 9 , 1. 1 3 6 reads: [ . .
I-sh-ru Su-te-li-6a-'
16n~-lum," [ A p p o i n t a n asjsembly, make my fate pre-eminent."
" V n No. 4 0 , 5 5 9 , 1. 1 3 7 reads: 1 . . . -s']u-ukki,~-nil-kam
mit-&a-~i-i:ha-di-ii ti-d-d[a]-ma.
l4 No. 40,559, ka-a-iu-nu-ma.
l5 No. 40,559, turn.
l6 NO. 4 c , 5 5 9 , mi-inz.
" No. 4 0 , 5 5 9 , in-ni-na~a.
'qK,
292, ![a$!.
"0.

"

.

I . A ~ -far
p a - a - ;ul
i - $ u - s"a77~- 7na
z. [a-na '"'Ga-ga ~uk-haZ-Zi]~-i'u a ~ n ~ a - t u i-zak-ha?,
3. [""Ga - ga suh - hall 2 - Zum 7nu - i 6 ka - 6it - ti - in
4. [a-na ""La&-mu u ""La-&]a2-muka-a-ta lu-uf-$ur-ira

5. [
6. [

. . . . . .
. . . , . .

.

.

J3

,

,

]

ti-z:-bu-ru te-li-'
{u-bi-ha a7za n~&-?*i-Ra~

-

ku - ru - na
9. [as"- na - an Z i h]u - [l]u7 l - ti - n
10.[a-na""Marduk 7n~]'0-tir-rt~i-miI-Ii-J'~-7zu'~
Zi-s"i-7fzus"iv~-ta'~
[a - Zih] 'O '"'Ga - ga bud - me - Su - nu i - ziz - ma :3
I z. [~lzim-mu-u]
l%-zah-ha-r~~-ha
sir-un-nu-a ana l 4 fa-a-in-nu
I I.

' T h e first two words in the line are restored from t h e catch-line
i n Tablet 11 ; see I<. 2 9 2 and No. 40,559.
a Lines 2-4 are conjecturally restored; for the restoration of
1. 3, cf. t h e similar line spoken by Apsb when addressing Mummu
i n Tablet I, I. 31.
Jensen compares 1. 14, and suggests the restoration [te-1?1
lib-62-ia],i.e. " [The purpose of my heart] thou canst u~~derstand."
82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316 reads ma-ah-n-lh, i.e. ''thou shalt bring
before me" ; this reading gives better sense, as it is possible t o
refer t h e phrase to a n answer t o t h e summons, which Gaga is
directed t o bring from Labmu and Lahamu. As, however, the
duplicate is merely a practice-tablet containing extracts from the
text, I have retained the reading of I<. 3,473, etc.

AnSar opened his mouth,' and
[Unto Gaga], his [mini~ter],~
spalie the word :
3. " [0 Gaga, thou minis]ter2 that rejoicest my
spirit,
4. " [Unto Labmu and Lahlamu will I send thee.
5. " [ . . . . . . . . ] thou canst attain,
6. " [ . . . . ] thou shalt cause to be brought
before thee.4
7. ' I [ . . . . . . let] the gods, all of them,
8. " [Make ready for a feast],' at a banquet let
them sit,
9. " [Let them eat bread],' let them mix wine,
10. " [That for Marduk]," their avenger, they may
decree the fate.
I I . " [Go,]l0 Gaga, stand before them,
I z. " [And all that] lo I tell thee, repeat unto them,
(and say) :
I.

2.

y e n s e n suggests the restoration [li-2-li-ku-u-ni iZ]8ninr, " let the
gods come."
82-9-18, 1,403 6 , 3 1 6 , [gla-ah.
' Lines 8 and 9 are restored from 11. 133 and 1 3 4 .
81-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, In-uf-6n.
a 82-9-18, 1 , 4 0 3
6 , 3 1 6 , hu-ru-un-nu.
'O Conjecturally restored.
'I K. 3,437, etc., reads Su-fn-nu, i.e. gimiZli-fu-nu.
la 82-9-18,
1 , 4 0 3 6 , 3 1 6 , Gnz-turn.
82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, ~u-~d-rni-.Fu-nu
i-21-&-ma.
'' 82-9-18, 1,403 + 6,316, a-nu.

+

+

+

40

CIlEATION SERIES, TABLET 111.

13. [ A n - h r ] '

ma-ru-hu-nu u-nza-'-i-ra-an-?zi
Z L - f a - a s - h i - r a - a n - n ii a - a - t i

14. [ t e - r i l l 2 libhi-&
1 5.

[urn-ma

Ti-a]nzat3

a-lit-ta-ni4

i-zip-ra-aiz-nu-Si"

[ p u - u& - ru ?it - h]u6 - nu - at - ma a5 - gis" Lab - bat
17. is - &u - ru - Siln - ma
ilani
g i - rnir - Su - un
1 8 . a - d i ?a a t - t u - n u t a b - n u - a i - d a - f a a / - h a
16.

23. Urn - mu - @/L- burl4 pa - ti - ?at Is
ha - la - [nza]I"
24. US-rad-di ha-ah-hi la ma&-n' it-ta-lad sivriza&P["I '7
2s.

26.

za& - tu - rna :in - ni'8 La pa - dzd - u at - ta - ' - [i] Is
am-tu hi-ma da-?r/iz0 zu-mur-fu-7zu z~S-nza-al-L[i]~~

' Restored from 1. 7

1.
Restored from 1. 72.
Restored from 1. 73.
' 82-9-18, 1,403 6,316, ~ I U .
9 2 - 9 - 1 8 , 1,403 + 6,316, i-xi-iy-ra-an-na-a-li.
Restored from I. 74.
' 82-9-18, 6,950 83-1-18, 1,868, i-du-&~.
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., ledi-u-ni.
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., im-mu.
'O 82-9-18,
6,9ja, elc., i.z.
" 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., [a-ab-bu. I2 82-9-;8, 6,950, etc., [ ; ] L i f .

+

+

13. " [Angar],' your son, hath sent me,
14. " [The purpose] of his heart he hath made
known unto me.
1 5 . " [ H e saith that Tia]mat3 our mother hath conceived a hatred for us,
16. " [With all]' her force she rageth, full of wrath.
1 7 . " All the gods have turned to her,
18. '' With those, whom ye created, they g o at her
side.
19. " They are banded together, and at the side of
Tiamat they advance ;
2 0 . " They are furious, they devise mischief without
resting night and day.
2 1 . <'They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ;
2 2 . " They have joined their forces and are making
war.
23. " Ummu-uubur, who formed all things,
24. " Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she
hath spawned monster-serpents,
2 5 . " Sharp of tooth and merciless of fang.
26. " With poison instead of blood she hath filled
their bodies.

Restored from 1. 80 ; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads turn.
l5 82-9-18,
6,950, etc., pa-at
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., bu-ur.
" ~ e s t o r e dfrom 1. 81 ; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads mu.
" Restored from 1. 82.
82-9-18, 6,950, etc., ti-in-na.
'"estored
from 1. 83 ; 82-9-18, 6,950, etc., reads an-la-'-a[nz].
2V2-9-18, 6,950, etc., da-me.
Lines 26-32 have been restored from 11. 84-90.
l3

42

CREATION SERIES, TAliLET 111.

27. uSningaZZ~~' nu-ad-ru-u-ti
28. me

- lam - 7ne

29. a - mi?

-

61

puZ-&a-a-ti

us"-das"- Sa - a

-

nu

e - Zis"

u-SaZ-biS-[ma]
unz - taz- [Sill1

ZisW-Ear - [ m i -

Sar - 6a - 6a

i~?z]

30. ZU-MUY-Su-nuLiS-tab-Ei-dam-ma Za i-pzi-'-a i-rat-su-[un]
31. us" - zie
3 2 u - gal

- as' - mu

ba

-

ln?n

R

~ i -rruS - Su
-

n

BE

z/

'"'La - ha - [lizi]
&a6

-

nn/iZ[u]

33. % - m i d a - a b - Y Z L - t i nzin-amZZn u ku-sa-rib-[,'luI3
34. na - as" kakk?" la pa - d i - i Za a-di-ru ta-&[a-zi]

36. ap$u-un-na-7na eS-tin eS-ri-tzrm Kima Su-a-tu US-tab-[Si]

37. i-na

iZaizi . bu-uk-ri-Sa Su-ut

is"-kun - Si

[pu-ah-ri]

39. [a]-Zi-hut ma&-ri pa-an um-~na-ni [mn-ir-~,u-utpuhri]
40. [nu-a]; k a k k ~ * ' V i - 6 - b u - t u ti-[bu-u a-iza-a~z-tzr]
41. [ f u - u d ]

m - a6

tam - &a - r i

' See above, p.

16 f., note 5.
Restored from Tablet 11, I.

s"ik - [ha - tu - t i ]

Scc above, p. 18, note 3
29.

" Fierce monster - vipers she hath clothed with

27.

terror,
With splendour she hath declted them, she hat11
made them of lofty stature.
29. " Whoever beholdeth them, terror overcometh
him,
30. " Their bodies rear up and none can withstand
their attacli.
31. " She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the
(monster) Lahamu,
32. '' And hurricanes, and raging hounds, and scorpionmen,
33. And mighty tempests, and fish-men, and rams ;
34. " They bear merciless weapons, without fear of
the fight.
35. " Her commands are mighty, none can resist
them ;
36. " After this fashion, huge of stature, hath she
made eleven (monsters).
37. " Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as
he hat11 given her [support],
38. " She hath exalted Kingu ; in their midst she
hath raised [him] to power.
39. " T o march before the forces, [to lead the host],
40. [To] give the battle-signal, to advance [to the
attack],
41. " [To direct] the battle, to co~ltrolthe [fight],

28.

"

' I

4
J

Lines 3 4 - q ~ have been rcstorcd from 11. 9 2 - 1 0 3
K. 6,6ja, [nn-,?a-]a, or [na-&]e, llakkr~.

44

CREATION SEKIES, TAHLE'T 111.

- --

-~

-~~

42 [z$-+id]-ma

44 - t u i - f i ~ u-ie-Si-ba-US-[Su

43. [ad- d ] i ta - a - Ra

ina puhur

ildni

-- -

inu kar-ri]

[u - s'au- 6i- ha]

44. [ma]-li-ku-ut iLdni gi-7izir-[Su-nu ka-tuk-ka

uS-i~~al-Li]

45. [Lu - u ] .fur-6a - la - ina &a- ' - i - r i 3 e - du - [u at- ta]
46. li-ir-tab-bu-u ziR-ru-ka eli Kali-Sz~-iz[u. . '"'A-?zun-fzn-hi]'

48. ha-ta kiiiit-ka la in-nin-nu-a Li-kulz +it

-

49. in-nu-nu '"'I<in-gu {'A US-&u-u li-ku-u
mdu2*' - fa
si' - ?>za- ta
pi - Ru - n u 1 $ 'ii'Gibi114

pi-i-[ha]

'

["'A-nu-ti]8

is" - t[z - mi,]l1
Li - izi - ih - ha

50

an

5 I.

Zp

52.

nd'id inalUKit-lnn-rilG 9x4-ag-fa-ri lis' mb - bi- i6 '7

ildrii

- fu l2

K . 6,650, p'm-rat-su-nu.
K. 6,650, ka-id-4[u]; according to this reading, I. 44 docs not
form part of Tiamat's speech, or we may suppose that in this line
Tiamat addresses her followers and not Kingu (cf. note 7).
K. 6,650, ha-'4.
Restored from 1. 104: the Annnnalri are possibly the subject
of the sentence (see below, p. 52 f., note 8 ) .
TK.
b,650, lu.
So No. 42,285 ; I<. 6,650 reads i-ra-a[f-su].
' Restored from Tablet 11, I. 4 4 : No. 42,285 readspi-i-Su, "the
word o f his mouth shall be established," i.e., l'iamat addresses her
followers in the second half of the line.
Restored from Tablet 11, 1. 45 ; No. .+z,z85 reads e-nr~-ti,
" lordship, rule."
a

42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.

Unto him [hath she entrusted ; in costly
raiment] she hath made him sit, (saying) :
" ' [I have] uttered thy spell, in the assembly of
the gods [I have raised thee to power],
dominion over all the gods [have I
" ' [The]
entrusted unto thee].
" ' [Be] thou exalted, [thou] my chosen spouse,
" ' May they magnify thy name over all of [them
. . . . the Anunnalti].'
" She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny, on
his breast she laid them, (saying) :
" ' Thy command shall not be without avail, and
the word of [thy] ' mouth shall be established.'
" Now
Kingu, (thus) exalted, having received
[the power of A ~ U ] , ~
" Decreed the fate for the gods, her sons, (saying):
" ' Let the opening of your mouth quench the
Fire-god l4 ;
" 'Whoso is exalted in the battle, let him display
(his) might ! '
"

* K. 6,650, min-?-{a ; No.

93,017, ma-ri-e-!a.
No. 93.0~7,Si-ma-in; No. 42,285, fi-ma-/?:
Restored from Tablet 11, 1. 46 ; No. 42,285 reads ut-ti-u, o r
US-fi-!am.
K. 6,650, [ip-!]a.
K. 6,6jo, pi-i-ku-nrr ; No. 93,017, pi-ku-un.
" K. 6,650 and No. 93,017, ""BIL-GI ; K. 3,473, etc., and
No. 42,285, "GIS-BAR.
'"na
is omitted by I<. 6,650 and No. 93,017,
IS
No. 93,017, kzf-mu-ra : 82-9-18, 1,403 6,316, kit-mu-ru.
I<. 6,650 probably reads hit (not {if)-nu-lsc.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., Ii-9-n-ah-hi-2%.
'O

''

+

46

CREATION SERIES, TABLET III

- -~

-

53. as"-pur - nza "'A - 72u - urn I uZ i - Zi- ' - a 7na-/l~7,~-;a
54. "'Nu - dim - mud i - dur - ma
i - tu - ra ar - & i f 5
5 5 . ' - i r "'iMarduk n 6 - k a l - Z u 6 iZ&i ? n a - r u - R u - u n '

56. ma-ha-riS8 Ti-nnzntg Zib1o-6a-iu a - m ub-La

62. ip-Su pi-ia ki-ma ha-tu-nu-?nuz1 Ti-nza-tu Zzf-&n-ma
63. Za ut-CUR-kar mim 23 - mu - u a - 6an - nu - zf a-nu-ku
64. ai i - tuvx a i in - nin - na - n se - bar ?a# - ti - in2"

'

K. 6,650, No. 93,017, and 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., i[s'A-nt~m.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., i-Li-'-im ; No. 42.285, i-li-'-i:
No. 42,28j, ha-ar.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., i-du-ur-ma.
"0.
42,285,
No. 93,017, 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, adkal.
' No. 42,285, ma-ruk-ku-un.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., n'-z3.
No. 93.017, Ti-a-ma-ti.
' O 82-9-18,
1,403, etc., li-ib.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., mu-iir-ri.
lZ No. 93,017, Tam-tam-ma; 82-9-18,
1,403, elc., and No. 42,285,
Ti-amnt-am-ma.

A X ~ A K ' SI N S T K U C T I O N S TO GAGA.

47

5 3 . " I sent Anu, but he could not withstand her ;
54. " Nudimmud was afraid and turned back.
55. " But Marduli hath set out, the director of the
gods, your son ;
56. " T o set out against Tiamat his heart hath
prompted (him).
57. " H e opened his mouth and spake unto me,
(saying) :
58. " ' If I, your avenger,
59. " ' Conquer Tiamat and give you life,
60, " 'Appoint an assembly, make my fate preeminent and proclaim it.
61. " ' In Up5ukkinaliu seat yourselves joyfully together ;
62. " ' With my word in place of you will 1 decree fate.
63. " ' May whatsoever I do remain unaltered,
64. " ' May the word of my lips never be changed
nor made of no avail.'
65. " Hasten, therefore, and swiftly decree for him
the fate which you bestow,
~

-

" N o . 42,285, ka-a-tu-un.

"

No. 93,017,fuk-nu-ma.
No. 93,017, ra.
l6 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., ie.
" N o . 93,017,ku; 82-9-18, r,403, etc., ham.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., mi-ii-ha-n-[is'].
la No. 42,285, di-ii.
20 N O . 42,285, ia-as'-ha-ma.
82-9-18, 1,403, etc., ha-a-iu-[nu-ma].
No.42,285,i"-ma-tun1lu-Si-lin. 23 82-9-1 8, 1,403, etc., mi-zlz.
'' 82-9-18, 1,403. etc., 2%-ur. "'N 442,285,lap-ti-i.
26 82-9-18, 1,403,etc., No. 42,285 and 82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-r-18,
z , r r6, ar-&i-if.
l5

GAGA GOES TO LAIJMU A N D LAIJAMU.

49

66. " That he may go and fight your strong enemy ! "
67. Gaga went, he took his way and
68. Humbly before Labmu and Lahamu, thc gods,
his fathers,
69. H e made obeisance, and he kissed the ground at
their feet.8
70. H e humbled himself ; g then he stood up and
spalte unto them, (saying) :
71. " AnSar, your son, hath sent me,
7 2 " T h e purpose of his heart he hath made 1;nown
unto me.
73. " H e saith that Tiamat our mother hath conceived
a hatred for us,
74. " With all her force she rageth, full of wrath.
75. " All the gods have turned to her,
76. " With those, whom ye created, they go at her side.
77. " They are banded together and at the sicle of
Tiamat they advance ;
l 3 8%-9-18,
1,403, etc., and 8 - 1 8 5,448, etc., u-nu-'-ira-an-[nil.
" 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., [it-r]i-it libhi-&.
'' No. 93.017, u-;a-a;-hi?-an-xi.
'"2-9-18,
1,403, rzid.
" 82-9-18,
1,403, i-zi-ir-ra-an-na-ti; No. 42,28j, iz-zi-ir-rcan-na-a-ti.
" 8%-q-18, 1,403, etc., &'-if.
'' NO. 93,017, YU.
*" 82-9-18, 1,403, etc., and No. 42,285, 8i-i;.
'
2 No. 93,017, 82-9-18,
1,403, etc., and No. 42,288, la-ah.
82-9-18, 1.403, etc., and No. 42,285, mi->.
23 I<. 8,575, i-da-a-fa.
24 NO. 42,285. a1 ka.
8,575, i-di~-;z.
I<. 8,524 and I<. 8,575, Ta-a-mu-ti; No. qz,zQg, Ti-amnf.
NO. 42,285, le 6 i n i

CREATION SEIIIES, TABLET 111.

50

79. na - f u

- u

80. unken-;za 5

tanz - ha - ri3 nn - za7? - hzr - 6zr
Sit-hu-nu-71ra i - ban - nu - u Qsu

81. Uvz - m u - @u - 6ur pa
82. us*- rad - d i

hahhz*J la flznb-ri 'o

83. zak - t u - m a
Sq. i;pz-ta hiiiza

87. a - m i r -

- ti -

hat8 Ka

La6 - hu
- la - a - ti'

-

Za - m a q

it-tn-lad sinizaha""

-

;in n i la pa - du - u n i - ta - ' - iIZ
da-a-;1zi'3 zir-lizur.-s'u-zzz1" u ~ - ~ z n - a l - l i ' ~

s'nr - ha - 6n li - i& - &ar - z?zi - iilz
88. xu-mir-Su-nu18 lif-tah-&i-dai7z-l?za la i-xi-'-% irat-su-us
f14

- nu

' I<. 8,575 and No.

42,285, ~~zu-.Fa.
NO. 42.185, fin-mu.
W o . 93,017, rn.
No. 42,285 and No. 93,017, la-a6-611.
W o . 93.017, zrn-hi-m-nu.
No. 4 ~ ~ 2 8 [i-ba]fz-nu-nza.
5,
' No. 93,017, turn.
No. 42,285, fin-at.
NO. 42,285, 17ZU.
lo No. q3,01i, kiikku la ma-liar.
" No. qz,t85, sir-mnb; No. 93,017, szi;mnh-i.
No. qz,z85 reads in-nf-'-i~iz,
a scribal error for at-ta-'-irn.

GAGA'S MESSAGE,

78.

s1

They are furious, they devise mischief without
resting- night and day.
79. " They prepare for battle, fuming and raging ;
80. " They have joined their forces and are making
war.
81. " Ummu-Hubur, who formed all things,
82. " Hath made in addition weapons invincible, she
hath spawned monster-serpents,
83. " Sharp of tooth and n~ercilessof fang.
84. "' With poison instead of blood she hath filled their
bodies.
85. " Fierce monster-vipers she hat11 clothed with
terror,
86. " With splendour she hath decked them, she hat11
made them of lofty stature."
87. " Whoever beholdeth them, terror overcometh him,
88. " Their bodies rear up and none call withstand
their attack.
89. " She hath set up vipers, and dragons, and the
(monster) Lahamu,
go. " And hurricanes, and raging hounds, and scorpionmen,
"

No. 93,017, im-fu ki-ma da-711i.
No. 42,285 seems to have had a variant reading.
'q
X.5~4,
. pul-ba-fa.
Ls No. 42,285, la.
" K. 8,524, e-lis"; see above, p. 1 6 f., note 5.
No. 93,017, zu-mur-iu-nu.
No. 42,285, [u]m-fall-ti-il.
20 NO. 93,017, "'SIR-RU~"'.
*' No. 93,017, UD- GAL*^ U R - R E * ~ ; for the ideogram UR-BE, see
above, p. 18, note 3.
l3
l4

CI~EATION SERIES, TABLET

52

9 2 . na - ax" k ~ k h 2 " ~la pa-di-i

93. gab - Sa te - r
94. up-pu-un-nu-inn

.I

la a - di - Y I I tn - bn - zi

-I -a

la 17za - &ar Si - izn - 7na
if-ti12 es'-]-it hi-7izn s'u-a-tn nf-tab-Si

96. u-fa-as'-hi '"'Kin-fu ina bi-rz-iu-nz~?a-a-in US-rn6-hi-iJ.'
97. a-Zi-ku-ut mab-ri"a-an
urn-ma-izi 7izu-i?,-ru-ut puhl-i
98. na - ax" KakKi"o ti-c-bu-tu te - 6%- u a - nn - an - tu
ra - a6
i i h - ka - tu - ti
tam - &a - ri 7
99. Su - ud
loo. ip - kid - ma ka - tus'- Ju
u-s'e-Si-bn-a;-fu inn kar-ri

102.

ma-li-kut

il&i

~iliz-vat-su-nu pa-tuk-ha

US-mnl-Zi

' Restored from Tablet 11, I. 29; No. 93,017 reads ~ ~ [ e r a s u r e ] - 1 < 1 .
NO. 93,017, njpu-7zn-111u.
NO, 93,017: kak-Ru.
No. 93,017, a-ii-iiz~ima-liar.
No. 93,017, ina.
' No. 93,0r7, 1".
No. 93.0'7, nn-Je-e k a k k r ~ .
I n t h e parallel passage in 1. 46, I<. b , 6 ~ oreads KAK (i.e. kali)-

GAGA'S MESSAGE.

53

And mighty tempests, and fish - men, and
[rams] ;
92. " They bear merciless weapons, without fear of the
fight.
93. " H e r commands are mighty, none can resist them ;
94. " After this fashion, huge of stature, hat11 she
made eleven (monsters).
95. " Among the gods who are her sons, inasmuch as
he hath given her support,
96. " She hath exalted Kingu ; in their midst she hath
raised him to power.
97. " T o march before the forces, to lead the host,
98. " T o give the battle-signal, to advance to the attack,
99. " T o direct the battle, to control the fight,
loo. '' Unto him hath she entrusted ; in costly raiment
she hath made him sit, (saying) :
101. " ' I have uttered thy spell, in the assembly of the
gods I have raised thee to power,
102. " ' T h e dominion over all the gods have I
entrusted unto thee,
1 0 3 " ' Be thou exalted, thou my chosen spouse,
104. " ' May they magnify thy name over all of them
. . . . the Anunna[ki].'
105. " She hath given him the Tablets of Destiny,
on [his] breast [she laid them], (saying) :
91.

"

{n-n[u . . . 1. I n the present line on No. 93,017 there are
traces of kali-&-nu followed by traces of two signs and by the word
""A-nun-nu-[ki]which ends the line. The Anunnaki are possibly
the subject of the sentence.
Line 105 has been restored from 1. 47.

54

CREATION SERIES, TABLET 111.

106. ha-ta &ibit-ka Za in-nin-[na-a li-knn +it

107. in-na-nu ""Kin-,p

I 10.

nri'id

u

i~za kit-mu-ru

-

I

[ di-pw-u

pi-i-ha]'
'"'A-lzu-ti]

7~za-ag-S[a-ri [is'- ?a6 - bi- ib]

as'-par- ma '"'A-nu-unz u2 i-[Zi-' - a 7nn -bar - fa]
I 12. ""Nu - diin - mud e - dur - ma
i - [iu - m ar - kii"]
I I 3. ' - i r ""Marduk ab - kad - [Zu i]ZZ[7zi mu - ru - ku - un]

I I I.

Ti - anzat

I 14.

ma - &a - ris'

115.

ip-fu pi-i-Su

l'i[6-6a-s'u a - ra

[i-tu-ma-a

a-na

u6 - la]
ia-a-ti]

a-7za-ku [ntu - tir g i - nziZ- d i - ku - Z L I ~ ]
a - katn - 7ne T i - anzat - nr[n u - 6 a l - la; k n - !u - uw]
I 18. Snk-nu-a-ma pu-u/z-rn
S[u - ti - ra i - ba - n izin - t i ]

I 16. Sum - ma - ma
I 17.

I 19, i-na

Up-Sn-ukkin-na-hi mi[t-ha-rir* &a-dis" tnS-bn-vzn]

2)-!n pi-in ki-nza k[a-ti6-nu-ma s'i-ma-tu Zu-Silrz-vza]
121. la
nt-tak-har mim-m[u]-n a-ban-nu-u [a-lza-ku]
I zz. [a]i i - tur [ai in] - ni7z - 7za - a se - bar
[in$ - ti - ia]

120.

Lines 106-108 have been restored from 11.48-jo and Tablet 11,
11. 44-46.

' Thy command shall not be without avail, [and
the word of thy mouth shall be established].' '
107. " Now Kit~gu,(thus) exalted, [having received
the power of Anu],
108. " [Decreed the fate] for the gods, her sons,
(saying) :
109. " ' Let the opening of your mouth [quench12 the
Fire-god ;
I 10. " ' Whoso is exalted in the battle, [let him display]
(his) might ! '
I I I. " I sent Anu, but he could not [withstand her] ;
I 12. " Nudimmud was afraid and [turned bacli].
113. " But Marduk hath set out, the director of the
[gods, your son] ;
I 14. " T o set out against Tiamat [his heart hath
prompted (him)].
I I 5. " H e opened his mouth [and spake unto me],
(saying) :
I 16. " ' If I, [your avenger],
I I 7. " ' Conquer Tiamai and [give you life],
I 18. " 'Appoint an assembly, [make my fate preeminent and proclaim it].
119. " ' I n Upiulikinaku [seat yourselves joyfully
together] ;
I 20. " ' With my word in place of [you will I decree fate].
1 2 1 . " ' May whatsoever [I] do remain unaltered,
122. " ' May the word of [my lips] never be changed
nor made of no avail.'
106.

"

-

' Lines

109-1 24 have been rcstored lrom 11. 5 1-66.

i d - du - Sum - ma
2. ma-&a-ri-is'
ab-bi-e-ju
3. at - ta - ma ha6 - ta - ta
4. Si-mat-ha La fa-na-an
5. " u M a ~ d ~ ~ ha6
k - ta - ta
I.

pa - rah
ru - bz~- til~r'
a-na liza-Zi-ku-tzn~ iy-me"
i - lza iL&zi ra - 6u - tuln
se - &-a?- ka
""A - izzun
i - na iieizi ra - bu - tunz

'

se - kar - ka '"'A - num
6. fi-mat-ka La fa-nu-art
7. is"-& u - m i - i m - m a la i n - n i x - n u - a k i - B i t - k a
8. s'u-us'-&-u-u u s'u-us'-pu-Lu s'i-i l u - u g n - a t - k a
9. L
hi-nu-at si-it pi-i-ka La sa-m-ar se-hay-ha
10.ma-am-ma-an

i-na i h n i

i - tuk - ha

la

it - ti - i4

I 2.

za - na - nu - tunz i r -Sat
a - far sa - gi - Su - nu

pa - yak
i h n i - ma
Lu-u Ku-nu as"- YU - uk - ka

13.

'*"Marduk

14.

at - ta - ma
ni-id-din-ka a
t

mu - tir - ru g i - ?nil- Z i - n i
k i f - ?at kaZ gi7n - r i - e - t i

I 5.

ti-Sam-tna i-na pu-bur3

lu - u Sa -ga - tn a-?nut-ka

I I.

T h e catch-line on the Third Tablet, preserved by I<.3,473, etc.,
reads ru-bu-u-fi.
T h e lines which follow contain the words addressed by the
gods to Marduk, alter he had taken his seat in their presence.

They prepared for him a lordly chamber,
2. Before his fathers as prince he tooli his place.'
3. " Thou art chiefest among the great gods,
4. " Thy fate is unequalled, thy word is Ailu !
5. " 0 Marduk, thou art chiefest among the great
gods,
6. " Thy fate is unequalled, thy word is Anu !
7. "Henceforth not without avail shall be thy
command,
8. " In thy power shall it be to exalt and to abase.
9. " Established shall be the word of thy mouth,
irresistible shall be thy command ;
10." None among the gods shall transgress thy
boundary.
I I . " Abundance, the desire of the shrines of the gods,
1 2 . " Shall be established in thy sanctuary, even
though they lack (offerings).
I 3. " 0 Marduk, thou art our avenger !
14. " W e give thee sovereignty over the whole world.
15. " Sit thou down in night,^ be exalted in thy
command.
16. " Thy weapon shall never lose its power, it shall
crush thy foe.
I.

,

This is preferable to the rendering "talre thy seat in the
assembly (of the gods)"; for the other gods tiad an equal right to
sit in the assembly.

60

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

17. be - Zum Sa tak - lu - ha

na -pi?- ta - i u g i - mil- ma

18. u ilu {a livz-ni-e-ti i-Eu-zu tu - 6%- uk

-

nap Sat - su

-

-

19. us"- z i - zu - 7na i - nn bi-ri-Su-nu lu ba - s'u ii" ten
20. a-nu '"'Mavduh bu-uk-ri-&-nu
1% nu iz zak ru
21. Si
mat - Ka be - Zuin Lu-u nzab-ra-at ilani-ma

-

-

-

- -

23. $
Sa
ji - i - Ka
Zi ' a
24. tu - uv h i - bi - Sum 7na Zu
ba

-

' - a

-

25.

i k - 6 i - m a i-na p i - i - i u

26.

i - tu - uv ik - bi - "urn - ma lu - ba

27. hi - ma si - it pi - i - Su i-mu-ru
28.

ih -

zg. u

du

-

- us -

30. id-di-nu-&

-

-

ZL

ik

si -

- vu
pu

Kah-ku

-

-

- bit
Zu - ba - S74
- Sn li - is" - liln
bit

-

Zu

Su it

La

*" /za;[a

ba

- tab

-

Su

- ni

iZ&i

ab-bi-e-szl

-

Say

621 'is'Ma~a'nk ma

- s'zl

-

-

uu

'*"ktrss&u pala(a)1

ma-a&-m da-'-i-6% za-ai-ri

a Lih ma s"a T i - amat nap-fa-tu-us" pu-vu-'-mas
32. {a-a-ru da-mi-& a-nu pu - u z - 7,a -turn L i - biz- Zu n i
31.

-

T h e translation o f p a l 2 as "ring" is provisional; the pale was
certainly a symbol of power.

THE GODS CONFER POWER O N MARDUIC.

61

0 lord, spare 'the life of him that putteth his
trust in thee,
18. " But as for the god who began the rebellion,
pour out his life."
19. Then set they in their midst a garment,
20. And unto Marduk their first-born they spake :
21. " May thy fate, 0 lord, be supreme among the
gods,
2 2 . " T o destroy and to create ; speak thou the word,
and (thy command) shall be fulfilled.
23. " Command now and let the garment vanish ;
24. " And speali the word agxin and let the garment
reappear ! "
25. Then he spake with his mouth, and the garment
vanished ;
26. Again he commanded it, and the garment reappeared.
27. When the gods, his fathers, beheld (the fulfilment
of) his word,
28. They rejoiced, and they did homage (unto him,
saying), " Marduk is king! "
29. They bestowed upon him the sceptre, and the
throne, and the ring,'
30. They give him an invincible weapon, which overwhelmeth the foe.
31. " Go, and cut off the life of Tiamat,'
32. " And let the wind carry her blood into secret
places."
17.

"

Lines 3 1 and 3 2 contain the final address o l the gods to
Mardult before he armed for the fight.

62

CREATION SERIES, TABLET I V

35. ib - si'm - 7na

*"$mWta

kak

- ha - &L

u

-

- nt ad

di

36. muL-mu[-Zuml &-tar-hi-bn u - kin - fu
ha
nu
37. is" S i - ma *"7ni!ta4 i t f z - n a - i u u - k - h i - i a
3 8. 'f" ha{la u "'"""i{-$a-turn 5 i - du - us' - fu i - Zu - uZG

-

-

39. is" kun bi - i r - +u 7 i - 7za
pa
n i - Su
40. nab-Zu 8 mus"- ta/Z - 7ni9-!u zu - ~ U T fu
r~m-fa-aZ-la lo

kZil-bis' 2 - a t l ~ a t "
41.i - p u - U S - 7na sa - p a - ra fn1-~IZU-u

42. ir-bit-ti fa-a-ri12 u!-te-i:-hi-ta ana La a-{i-e ~ ~ z ~ ~ P z - I I z ~ - & ' ~

44. i-du-us' sa-)n-ral4 z~f-talc-ri-ba' 5 hi-it-ii abi-fu ' 0 '"'A-ni7n
4 j. ib-ni im-&uZ-Za ;Era lim-nn '7 me-/la-ala a-s'n77z-s'?~-trim

' I<. 3,437, etc., omits lum.

I<. 3,437, etc.. ;i.
T h e scribe of No. 93,016 does not make a clear distinction
between the signs 4a and ma, and it is possible that the word is
ma-at-nu; its meaning is not certain.
K. 3,437, etc., mi!-[a.
"I(.
3,437, etc., omits the delerminative.
K. 3,437, etc., i-lul.
K. 3,437, etc., and 79-7-8, " 5 1 , NUM-GIR, i.e. 621.81~.
R. 3,437, etc., and 79-7-8, 2 5 1 , In.
lo I<. 3.437, ctc., u77z-inl-li.
I<. 3,437, etc., me.
No. 93,016, ki[r]-6ril-ifTam-fi?n.
No. 93 ,o I 6, lili//inz(/ii~z)
&Z~.ip'.

"

63

MARDUK ARMS FOR BATTLE.

33. After the gods his fathers had decreed for the
lord his fate,
34. They caused him to set out on a path of prosperity
and success.
35. H e made ready the bow, he chose his weapon,
36. H e slung a spear upon him and fastencd it . . .
37, H e raised theclub, in his right hand hegrasped (it),
38. The bow and the quiver he hung at his side.
39. H e set the lightning in front of him,
40. With burning flame he filled his body.
41. Me made a net to enclose the inward parts of
Tiamat,
42. The four winds he stationed so that nothing of
her might escape ;
43. The South wind and the North wind and the
East wind and the West wind
44. H e brought near to the net, the gift of his father
Anu.
45. H e created the evil wind," and the tempest, and
the hurricane,
46. And the fourfold wind, and the sevenfold wind,
and the whirlwind, and the wind which had no
equal ;
No. 93,016, mi-im-me-&.
" No. 93,051, ric.
After uf-tak-n-6a. No. 93,051 reads a-na[ . .
1.
' W o . 9 3 , o r 6 , [a.b]211[u]
" No. 93.051, Sa-ar Iim-nu. This phrase must be taken as a n
explanation of zn;-hul-la, i.e. "the evil wind," and not as the name
of a separate wind; for the list only comprises seven winds
(cf. 1. 47).
" NO. 93,051, f~fe-ht~-u.
ID No..q3,og1, VIIdi-inz.
For IM-NU-DI-A, No. 93,osr reads IN-DI-A-NU-DI~LA].
l3
'j

.

64

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

-

49. is'-s'i vza be - ZILI?~ a - 6u - ba

50.

?" narhabkz

u - mu'

la ma&-

Rakha - SZL ~a6ii(n)
6
n'8

ga-lit-fa9i7*-/m6' 0

55. [ . . . . . ] - a n m - a < - h a [ t ] z ~ - k z ~ - u n - t u u z
56. Su-me-la u [im-na
57. ?za-a/z-L[r@-ii-Yu. .

. . . ]-a
. . ] - ti

i-pat t [ u . . . . e ] i ~ - d [ i ] ~ '
pul-&-ti [/la]- ZI$ ma

-

No. 93,051, {a-a.ri.
' No. 93,051, [Air-hi-i];.
NO. 93,051, nl=ki-.iu.
No. q j , c g l , kc.
"0.
93,051, finA-kn-:u ra-fin-a-am.
No. 93,05 I . 6u.
' K . 3,437, etc., reads u-mu, " a storm," not {ihzlz, " a construction"; and this reading is supported by the duplicate
No. 93,051. Marduk is represented driving the storm a s his
chariot, drawn by fiery steeds.
No. 93,051, film.
NO. 93,051, 1 ~ .
In
No. 93,OjI. ir-ka-ab.
" NO. y3,05I, SWN.
l2 No. 93,051, ZVna-a;-ma-du.
l 3 No. 93,051, i-du-t~S-lu
i-la-ul.
" No. 93,ojr reads [ . . 1-gi-;zr; only one sign is wanting
lly
from the beginning of the line, and this is c o ~ i j e c t ~ ~ r arestored
I

a

.

47. H e sent forth the winds which he had created, the
seven of them ;

48. T o disturb the inward parts of Tiamat, they
followed after him.
49. T h e n the lord raised the thunderbolt, his mighty
weapon,
50. ~d mounted the chariot, the storm ' unequalled for
terror,
5 I . H e harnessed and yolced unto it four horses,
'~
overwhelming, and swift of
52. D e s t r u ~ t i v e ,ferocious,
pace ;
53. [ . . . . . ]I6 were their teeth, they were
flecked with foam ;
54. They were skilled in [ . . . 1,'' they had been
trained to trample underfoot.
55. [ . . . . . . . ],.mighty in battle,
56. Left and [right . . . . . . .
57. His garment was [ . . . . 1, he was clothed
with terror,

as I u in the transliteration. T h e new duplicate disproves the
restorations which have previously been suggested.
l5 NO. 93,051, !u.
'' Delitzsch suggests the restoration, [rnalZ rG]ti, "full of slaver."
'" No. 93,051, turn.
Delitzsch suggests t h e restoration lascma, " galloping " ;
Jensen, kam2ra, "casting down."
lo K. 3,437, etc., gives traces of i.
" No. 93,05 I , [l]a-arm]-d[u].
Lines 55 and 56 are talien by Delitzsch as referring to MarduL,
and by Jensen as referring t o t h e horses ; their suggested
restorations differ accordingly.
5

66

CREATION S E R I E S , T A B L E T ITr.

58. 7ne - lam - nzi - Su

sah - [ p n a ] - p i - ir r [ a ]- Su - us"- Su

'

59. us"- te - Sir - ma [bar-m-an-&
n]7,-&a-S1~u-Jar-di-nza
60. as'- ris" Ti-a7~zai [fa ag] % g a t pa -uu-us"- Su i f -kun
61.i-na
Sap-ti[ . .
.
. 1'
.z! - knl - lu
62. u - m i - i m - t a [ . . . 1 - i 4 t a - m e - i & / a & - f u i - S u
63. i - n a n - m i - & i - t [ z ~ l ] - l z ~ - Sil51zi
u~ i-tul-lu-iu
64. ilriui a62 - ?u i - u - u - a
ilani z - { z ~-l lu - SZL

.

.

65. it-&i-ma he - l u ~ n &ah-lu-us' T i - a -?no. - ti

i - hay - r i

.

71. [ild-di-[
. 18
Ti-amat ZLZ t
- hi-Sad-sn
72. i - n a f a $ - f [ i ] fa l u l - l a - a g u - h a / s a y - ? a - a - t i l o

There is just room upon the tablet for this restoration.
It is possible that more than two signs are wanting.
In the broken portion of the line thcre is not room for more
than three signs.
Jensen reads fanz-mi-lin tn-m[i]-i,I ' a plant of magical power."
If, however, fa and i are parts of the same word it is certain that at
least two signs are wanting between them.
"he
verb is possibly not to be taken from nalilu, but should
perhaps be transliterated 2-duZ-ZU-&L;
see above, p. r 3 , note I I .

67

MAI<DUI< SETS OUT.

58. With overpowering brightness his head WJS
crowned.
59. T h e n he set out, he toolc his way,
60. And towards the [ragling Tiamat he set his face.
61. O n his lips he held [ . . . 1,
62. . . . . [ . . l 4 he grasped in his hand.
63. T h e n they beheldS him, the gods beheld him,
64. T h e gods his fathers beheld him, the gods bellelcl
him.
6j. And the lord drew nigh, he gazed upon the
inward parts of Tiamat,
66. H e perceived the muttering6 of Kingu, her 5pouse.
67. -4s (Marduk) gazed, (Kingu) was troubled in his
gait,
68. His will was destroyed and his motions ceased.
69. And the gods, his helpers, who marched by his side,
70. Beheld their leader's [ . . .
and their sight
was troubled.
71. But Tiamat [ . . . 1, she turned not her neclc,
72. With lips that failed not "he
uttered rebellious
words : lo

I,'

See above, p. 1 2 , note z.
sign is am or bar; not more than one sign is wanting
before it.
The first sign in the line seems to be id; there is not mare
than one sign wanting.
Lit., "that were full" ; Zul-la-a is probably Perm. Pie1 from
lala (cf. H-W-B., p. 377).
lo Lit., <'she held fast rebellion."

' The

68

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

.

.

.

73. [
. 1-ta-[ . ] ' Sa be - Zuz*m iL&zi ti-6%-ka
74. [as"]- ru - usv-Su - un ip - /iu - ru Su - nu as" - ruk - ka
75. [is"-Si]

-

-

ma be - luin a - bu .6a hakka

- 1% rahi(a)

76. [

. . .

Ti]4-amaL Sa 2-nzi-lu

78.[

.

.

79.[
80. [
81. [
8z.[

. . . . . . ] ah#-{%-nu i - d a - [ . . . ]
. . . . 1-s"n--n t a - z i - r i 7 r i - e - [ . . . ]
. . . '"'ZCin-g]u8 a - n a h a - ' - r u - t [ i " h i ]
. . . . 1-1% a - u a p a - m - a : " " A n - n u - t i 1 o

83. [
84. [

. . . . Li7n-n]i-e-ti
. . . i L ] Z f ~ i ' ~a62(e)-a

,

.

.

]"-a-hi-ma

hi-a-am iS-pur-Si

di-Ki

a-na-an-[ti]

t e - s". - ' - e - maL'
L~-inut-ta-/Lz'~tuk-ti~z-ni

85. [Ln ?]a-an-da-at um-mat-hi Lu pit-ku-su Su-nu knkkaP'-ki

One sign is wanting at the beginning of the line, and there are
traces of three signs after La.
As the beginning of I. 7 3 is wanting, the meaning of Tiamat's
taunt is not quite clear.
Conjectural restoration ; cf. 1. 37.
Possibly restore [a-na Ti]-amat.
Probably restore [at-&ma ral-lin-a-ti.
' Possibly restore [u-bi-lu lib]-fin-hi-ma.

69

MARDUIC REPROACHES TIAMAT.

73. " [ . . . . 1 thy coming as lord of the gods,
74. " From their places have they gathered, in thy
place are they ! "
75. Then the lord [raised] the thunderbolt, his
mighty weapon,
76. [And againstI4 Tiamat, who was raging, thus he
sent (the word) :
77. " [ThouI5 art become great, thou hast exalted
thyself on high,
78. " And thy [heart hath prompted]' thee to call to
battle.
79. " [ . . . . . .
their fathers [ . . . 1,
80. " [ . . . ] their [ . . . ] thou hatest [ . . . 1.
81. " [Thou hast exalted Kinglu to be [thy] spouse,
82. " [Thou hast . . . ] him, that, even as Anu,
he should issue decrees.
83. " [ . . . . ] thou hast followed after evil,
84. " k n d [against]' the .gods my fathers thou hast
contrived thy wicked plan.
85. " Let then thy host be equipped, let thy weapons
be girded on !
86. " Stand ! I and thou, let us join battle ! "

1

' K. 5 , 4 z o c , fa-air-n'.
' Possibly restore [tu-Sa-a;-ki

""Z<in-Q]u; cf. Tablet I , 11. 128
and 135, and the parallel passages in Tablets 11 and 111.
li. 5 , 4 z o c gives traces of ti.
K. 5,4ZOC, "'A-[ .
. 1. I<. S,+ZOC, fe-ei-[ . .
'' Probably restore [a-nu illani. l 3 I<. 5 , 4 2 0 ~ ,i n .
NO.9 3 , o s I, ha-a-<u.

.

j4

_

1.

70

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

87. Ti - algzat
an - n i - ta
i - na
fe - mi - f a 1
u
{a
an
n
i 4 ?e - en - Sa
88. ma4 &u - tisV2 i - te - m i 3
89. is - si - ma T i - anzat Sit - mu - rit5 e - Z i - ta
90. ?uv - Sis"6 ma - aZ- nza - /if7 it - ru - ra ir*- da - a - [Sa]
91. i - m a n - n i S i p - t a i t - t a - ? z a 7 n - d i t a - a - [ S a I Y

-

93.

i7z

- nin - d7~- ma Ti - amat

94. ?a - as'- me{

it - ti6 - bu

a6hab ilkni*' ""Ma7~tuk

kit - ru

- 6u

ta - ha

- ci - ii

97. ip-te - ma pi - i - fa T i - amat a - na / a - ' - a - t z - f ~ ' ~
98. im-hnl-Za us"- te - r i - ba a-7za la ha - tawz sap ti-frr '4

99. iz - zu - t i ' V k r # * ' kar - fa - fa
i - :a - nu - 712n
100. in - n i - &ax Zib - ba - i a - wza pn - a - Sa
/IS-pal-k i

'"

- suh ?nu2- 7nul - Za i&- te - p i ha - m s - sn
kir - bi - fa
u - bat - ti - &a
u - Sal - Zi<
Zi6 - 6n

101. 1;102.

~p

' No.

93,051, inn ;e-nre-e-s'u.

NO. 93,051, me.
No. 9 3 , 0 5 ~ri-i!.

' No. 93,05 1, [li-i].;.
"0.

93,051, tn-a-!u.

No. 93,ojr, ii-ri.

' No. 93,o.r I, nu.
No. 93,051, [fi-q;
NO.93.05 1 , it-l-u-1.2~
I~-IJ~-LI-S~L.

TI-IE DEATH OF

TIAMAT.

71

When Tiamat heard these words,
She was like one possessed, she lost her reason.
Tiamat uttered wild, piercing cries,
She trembled and shook to her very foundations.
She recited an incantation, she pronounced her
spell,
92. And the gods of the battle cried out for their
weapons.
93. Then advanced Tiamat and Marduk, the counsellor
of the gods ;
94. T o the fight they came on, to the battle they drew
nigh.
95. The lord spread out his net and caught her,
96. And the evil wind that was behind (him) he let
loose in her face.
97. As Tiamat opened her mouth to its full extent,
98. H e drove it1 the evil wind, while as yet she had
not shut her lips.
99. T h e terrible winds filled her belly,
loo. And her courage was talien from her, and her
mouth she opened wide.
I O I . H e seized the spear and burst her belly,
102. H e severed her inward parts, he pierced (her)
heart.
103. H e overcame her and cut off her life ;
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.

"

K. 5,4Zoc, u-;i?-'-a-lu

"

No. 93.051, kak-ki-JIL.
K. ~ , ~ z ola.
c,
K. ~ , + z o ch, m .

l3

"

;

No. 93,051, [ . . . -?]a-a-lu,
'=K. ~ , . + z o cme.
,

"'.
I
i

5,4206, {a.
K. s,qzoc, su.

72

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

104.fa-lan-;a1
zd-da-a
eZi-Sa
105 u l - tu
T i - amat
a -22
pa - n i
106 R i - i p r i - s h up-tar-7.i-ra p u - b u r - i n
107 u
ilzni
r i - su - s"a
a - Z i - hu

i-za-za2
i - na - 1.u
is-sa$-b~z
z - d i - Sa

[el - sir - s"u - nu - ti - wza kahke*'- Su - nn u - &b - bir
r 1 2 . s ~ - p a - r i S n a - d u - ~ n a ha-ma-?is'
us"-6u

I I I.

I

14. Se

H 5. n

- rit - su
is"- ten

a
es"-rit

' K. 5 , 4 2 0 0 ~and 79-7-8,

-n -a

ha

- Zu - 24

k i - suk

- hzS

nab-ni-ti Suizcntpul-&a-ti i-;a-nu

Z ~ F la-lam-luS.
,
a I<. 5,4ZOOC, iz-xi-za.
X. ~ , ~ z o cz~-~11/1-hi-ra
,
al-hat-SU-11%.
I<. 5,+zoc, di-,l.
T h e sign begins with a single horizontal wedge; we cannot
therefore read [as]-Rup. I t is possible that the first word is a verb
in t h e Permansive, parallel t o na-du, US-bu,and ma-lu-u; we may
perhaps read [in]-du,and translate t h e line, "standing in the
/. they were filled with lamentation,"

THE ROUT OF TIIE REBEL IlOST.

73

104.
105.
106.
107

H e cast down her body and stood upon it.
When he had slain Tiarnat, the leader,
Her might was broken, her host was scattered.
And the gods her helpers, who marched by her
side,
108. Trembled, and were afraid, and turned back.
109. They took to flight to save their lives ;
I 10. But they were surrounded, so that they could not
escape.
I I I. H e took them captive, he broke their weapons ;
112. In the net they were caught and in the snare
they sat down.
113. The [ . . ] . . of the world they filled
with cries of grief.
114. They received punishment from him, they were
held in bondage.
115. And on the eleven creatures which she had filled
with the power of striking terror,
116. Upon the troop of devils, who marched at
h e r [ . . . . 1,
I I 7. H e brought affliction, their strength [he . . . ] ;
I 18. Them and their opposition he trampled under
his feet.
So I<. 5,420~;in K. 3,437, etc., the sign which follows ti is
$[a], $ [ a ] , or $ [ a ] .

' I n No. 93,016

the line begins: T E - L A L - h 1 6 , i.e. fa12?gL.
There a& traces of at least three signs betwccn ka and the last
sign but one in the line, which is [nli, or [ i l r .
No. 93,016, it-fa-ad-d[i].
lo I think there is no doubt that the sign is us.

74

CKEATION SERIES, TABLET IV.

rrg. u " " I f i n - g u ;a

ir-tab-bu-u'

ina [ e 2 - l i ] - & - u 1 z

rzo. zk-nzi-fu-ma it-ti "'Dug-ga(-)e ;ua-a-[

."
. . ]in-nz-su

rzz. i-na hi-sib-bi ik-nu-K~IIZ-nzazl. - tu - us'Qt

124. a i - bu7
I25.

-

- 7rzu - u&

-

nzut ta - ' dug
u - f a -pu - u Su-ri-hiiz
ir-nit-ti An-s'ar e l izn-ki-ru "a-li-iS
u f -s i - z i ~

26. ni-is-mat ""Nu-dinz-7nlrd ik-s'u-du "' Mal-dz~k kar-du
127. e-li i
i Ka-m~-tunz'~si-bit-ta-fu u-dan-nilz-nza
I

128. si-ri-isr" Ti-airrat

s'a ik-mu-u i - tz~- ra ar - hi - is"

rzg. ik - bu - us - ma
130. i-na mz-(i-fu la
131." - p a r - r i - '
i2 I
a - a - u

be - l u ~ n s'a Ti-n-n~a-tunz'~
i-3-sa
pa-di-i zd - nut - t i
71zu- u& - &a
- ma
usv-la-at da-~ni-?a
ta - 7zu a-na pu-uz-rat usv-t a - liil

'

Rm. z, 83, iy-tadu-u.
T h e beginning of the sign e is preserved by I<. ~ , q z o c .
T h e sign is clearly written and is {u, not la as Uelilzsch and
Jensen transliterate i t ; t h e end of the line may perhaps be restolcd
a s J'ir-a-[A] rin-ni-Iu.
' Rm.2, 83, l a si-m[al- . . 1.

.

75

MARDUIC R E T U R N S T O TIAMAT.

19. Moreover, Icingu, who had been exalted over
them,
1 2 0 . H e conquered, and with the god Dug-ga he
counted him.
1 2 1 . H e took from him the Tablets of Dcstiny that
were not rightly his,
1 2 2 . H e sealed them with a seal and in his own
breast he laid them.
1 2 3 . Now after the hero Mardulc had conquered and
cast down his enemies,
1 2 4 . And had made the arrogant foe even like .
.,
1 2 j . And had fully established Aniar's triumph over
the enemy,
1 2 6 . And had attained the purpose of Nudimmud,
1 2 7 . Over the captive gods he strengthened his
durance,
1 2 8 . And unto Tiamat, whom he had conquered, he
returned.
1 2 9 . And the lord stood upon Tiamat's hinder parts,
3 0 And with his merciless club he smashed her skull.
1 3 1 . H e cut through the channels of her blood,
1 3 2 . And he made the North wind bear it away into
secret places.
133. His fathers beheld, and they rejoiccd and were
glad ;
I

.

R m . 2 , 83, /,i~z-nGe-iu.
Rm. z , 83, ir-tui.
llm. 2 , 83, mul.la-du.
83, 62:
'"m.
z., 81. i/2ni kc-nu-u-ti.
Rm. z. 87. eli nu-ki-ri.
Rm. z; 8;'probably read [a-d]~..
Rw. 2, 83, T L - u - I I L G - ~ ~ . l 3 Rm. 2 , 83, [ T ] i - u [ a u l ]

'* Km. 2,

4 .

"

76

CREATION SERIES, TABLET IV

34. & - di - e Sul-uza-nu u-{a-hi-iu Sn-nu a-na Sa-n-Su
135i-nz-u/i-ma
b e - l n ~ n Sa-lam-tn-us' i - 6 n v - r i
I 36. Sir hzl - p u l u za - a - zu i-ban-nu-a
nih - la - a - ti
I

-

137. i/i-pi-Ti-uza ki-ma nu-nu mas"-di-e a-nic Si~zn-Su
138. mi-iS-lu-%;-;a 2-ku-nain-ma Sa - Inn - ?iza u - ,cn - al - Mil2
139. iS-du-udpav-hn ma-as-;a-vu u - Sa - as - bi - it
140. m e - e - J a la S n - : a - n S u - n u - t i u r n - t n - ' - i v
141. &me'(e) i - b i - i ~ ,
asv-va - t u ~ ~ i-hi-?anz-?/fn
z
142. uJ-tarn-hi-ir mi-ih-?at apsZ Su - bat '"'Nu - uli~iz- uz~rd

143. im-Ju-u&-ma be- lum Sa
144. es"-gal- la tam - Si La
145. es"-gal - La E - Sar - ra
146. '"'A-num '"'6i2 u '"'E-a

-

apsi bi - nu - tu - U S -Su
u hi - in
E - Snv - 1n.
Sn ib - nu - u fa - ma - fizz
uza-&a-zi-Su-u7z ZLS-vanz-nia

-

T h e meaning of ku-pu is uncertain : Jensen takes Jir as a
determinative, and assigns to Bu-pu the meaning " IrunB, body."
See above, p. 3, note 14.

THE STABLISHING OF THE I~IEAVENS.

77

134. Presents and gifts they brought unto him.
135. Then the lord rested, gazing upon her dead body,
136. While he divided the flesh of the . . . ,1
and devised a cunning plan.
137. H e split her up like a flat fish into two halves ;
138. One half of her he stablished as a covering for
heaven.'
139. H e fixed a bolt, he stationed a watchman,
140. And bade them not to let her waters come forth.
141. H e passed through the heavens, he surveyed the
regions (thereof),
142. And over against the Deep he set the dwelling
of Nudimmud.
143. And the lord measured the structure of the Deep,
144. And he founded E - b r a , a mansion like unto it.
145. T h e mansion E-iara which he created as heaven,
146. Me caused Anu, B d , and E a in their districts to
inhabit.
For the reason of this change in the use of the word opsa, in
contrast with its personal meaning in the First Tablet, see the
Introduction.

2.

kaRkab6ni*'

taIu - Sil - Su

- ?zu

2~1-71za - 22

us*-s i - iz

3. u - a d - di sirtta
9 1 - i - a - a
u - ~iza- as - ;ir
4. X I (
ar&*'
kakhabdni"
111 "'"~""
us" - s i - iz
5. is'- t u fd - fnz fa fatti uj-;[i
.
1 zr-;u-7,a-ti

.

.

e -pisV an - 7 z i la e - ,r/~
- u 7ua - na - 71za
8. //la= - za - az " " B ~ L u ""E - a 21 - [klin it - t z - SI,
9. ip - ie - ma
abuLl#i*'
ina
si - Li k i - Lal- la - an
".
u i91z - na
10. sz - z a - ru u d - dan - x i - iza s"u - /?re - La

7. a

- ~zn La

13. u-ad-di-~u7~z-maSu-ak-~zat nzu-fi a-na ud-n'zl-u u-nze

The catch-line on the Fourth Tablet, preserved by No. 93,016,
reads: u-6a-a!-Sim ma an-sa-aa an iXni ra bi-u-Lxm.
A list of the seven ZumaSi-stars, or constellations, is given in

He.(i.e. Marduk) made the stations for the great
gods ;
2 . T h e stars, their images, as the stars of the Z ~ c l i a c , ~
he fixed.
3. H e ordained the year and into sections he divided it ;
4. For the twelve months he fixed three stars.
5. After he had [ . . . ] the days of the year [ . . . ]
images,
6. H e founded the station of Nibir3 to determine
their bounds ;
7. That none might err or go astray,
8. H e set the station of Bel and E a along with him.
9. H e opened great gates on both sides,
10. H e made strong the bolt on the left and on the
right.
I I . In the midst thereof he fixed the zenith ;
1 2 . T h e Moon-god he caused to shine forth, the night
he entrusted to him.
13. H e appointed him, a being of the night, to cletermine the days ;
14. Every month without ceasing with the crown he
covered(?) him, (saying) :
I.

111R, pl. 57, No. 6, 11. 53-56 ; see further, Jensen, Kosn2ologie,
PP. 47 ff.
1.e. Jupiter.

"his

meaning is conjecturally assigned t o fiabitiu.

80

CREATION SEI<IES, TABLET V.

15. i - n a rPs' nrbi-nzn n n - p a - & [ i - n n ] 7 i z a - a - t i

17. i - nu
18. [ U I T Z ] ~

fi1ni
XIV-tu

z z . [inn umi

. . .]

V(IrAN

a - ga

-n

[?unz - { z ~ ] - /a

in-u sVu-fn7iz-/2u-7~ztme?-/[i

. . . 1-zz

Zu ?u-tam-kn-rat ""SiznznSI /u 5;1-~za-[..]

23. [

. . . . .

24. [

. . . . . . . .

26.[

. . . . . . . . . . .

] - . F i - u ~ g z ~b n - ' - i

u-ru-z~jt-fa

flu-fa$-ri-ba-nzn di-na

]

di-na

in-a-ti

' na-6a-a-fais possibly the Perm. from naliii ; Jensen takes it as
the Infinitive from nn6iLtu with an Imperative meaning.
T h e reading of VZu-miis certain. K. 3,567 I<. 8,588 reads
VZ [
]-mi,while the duplicate I<. 8,526 reads [ . . . ]u-mu
(see also First Sfeps in Assynbn, p. 1 6 0 ) . George Smith's reading
!a-ma-mu, " t o determine heaven," which has been followed by
Zimmern and Delitzsch, gives little sense; Jcnsen reads z(<)n(?)-nzz;
which he does not translate. T h e reading ann ud-iEu zi V I $,-mi,

...

+

81

MARDUI<'SCHAKGE TO THE MOON-GOD.

" A t the beginning of the month, when thou
shinest upon the land,
16. " Thou comrnandestl the horns to determine six
days,'
17. " And on the seventh day to [divide] the crown.
18; " On the fourteenth day thou shalt stand opposite,
thehalf [ .
1.
19. When the Sun-god on the foundation of heaven
[ .
] thee,
20. " T h e [ .
1 thou shalt cause to . . . ,
and thou shalt make his [ . . . 1.
2 1 . " [ . . . . ] . . unto the path of the Sun-god
shalt thou cause to draw nigh,
2 2 . " [And on the
.
day] thou shalt stand
opposite, and the Sun-god shall . . [ . . . ]
"
23.
[ .
.
. ] to traverse her way.
24. " [ .
1 thou shalt cause to draw nigh,
and thou shalt judge the right.
2 5 . " [ . . . . . . . . . ] to destroy
26. " [ . . . . . . . . . . . . ]me.

15.

I'

" t o determine six days," agrees well with 1. 1 3 , where Marduk is
described as appointing the Moon-god a-nu ud-du-u u-me, < ' t o
determine the days" ; moreover, the phrase is appropriately
followed in I. 17 by the statement of the Moon-god's duty on the
seventh day.
One sign is wanting.
Perhaps read arh'i.
Possibly read iliu.
6

82

CREATION' SERIES, TABLET V.
[The following twenty41vo liner are taken froin I<. 3,449ni
and prohably form part of the Fifth Tablet.']

(66) u - [ . . . . .
(67) zar - ba - 6% [ . .
(68) i f - tu [ . . . .
(69) ina E - sag - giZ [
(70) Run - na [ . . .
( 7 1 ) 7nan - za - az ""[ .

. . . . . . . . I
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
(72) iZ~ni*' rabatz*' [ . .
(73) ilani" ik - [ . . . .
(74) i7n - bur - ma [ . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

. . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .

(75) sa-pa-?*a s"a i-te-ip-pu-3u ii-nu-ru

.77za

(78) if. ji

(79) '1" haSta
(80)

i77z -.

bi -

R Z

(81)i{-<u a-rik
(82) ?ai-;u

'"' A .num ina $lr$ur

it-ta-SiR
~a
""&Sti
lu

?urn-?a

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

. 1
. 1
. 1
. I

. .
. .
. .
. .

.
.
.
.

. 3
. ]
. I
. 1

ila7zipi [a&*'-Su]

ihi1iip' [ . . .

Si-i
ki - a

.
.
.
.

[

- am

. . . .
[?UIJI~"

if-ie-nu-urn-ma ?aCn-nzi[
Taftu

1

z'na faiamyd) [

]
- fa]

. . .

]

. . . ]

I f K. 3 , 4 4 9 ~forms part of the Fifth Tablet, the position of the
fragment may he roughly ascertained from the fact that the end of
the obverse and the beginning of the reverse are preserved. T h e
first line preserved was probably not earlier, though it may have
been some lines later, than the 66th line of the text.

MARDUIC'S I(OW I N HEAVEN.

83

[The following twenty-two lines are taken from I<. 3,445~3,
and probahly form part of the Fifth Tablet.']

. . . . . . . . . . . . . ]
(67). . . [ . . . . . . . . . . . . ]
(66).

[

From
[ .
.
.
.
.
. ]
In E-sagil [ . . . . . . . . . ]
T o establish [ .
.
. ]
The station of [ .
.
.
. ]
The great gods [ .
.
.
. ]
T h e gods [ . . . . . . . . . ]
H e took and [ . . . . . . . . . .
(75) T h e gods [his fathers] beheld the net which he
had made,
(76) They beheld the bow and how [its work] was
accomplished.
(77) They praised the worli which he had done

(68)
(69)
(70)
(71)
(72)
(73)
(74)

I

[....I.

(78) Then Anu raised [the . . . . ] in the
assembly of the gods.
(79) H e kissed the bow, (saying), " It is [ . . . . "
(80) And thus he named the names of the bow,
(saying),
(81) " ' Long-wood' shall be one name, and the
second name [shall be . . . . 1,
(82) And its third name shall be the Bow-star, in
heaven [shall it . . . . 1 1 "

I!

For the
a The traces upon the tablet are possibly those of z).
restoration cf. IVR, pl. 1 2 , Obv., 1. 24; Delitzsch suggests the
reading cpiissa.

84

CREATION SERIES, TABLET V.

(83) u .hi12 .7na

Si - 7ua - a - ti Sa

(84) u l - f n

.
]
[ . . . . . . ]
. . . . . . . . . 1

g i - is - g a l - la

(8 5) [id .d ] i - 71za

[

-rx hussd

(86) [

. . . . ]

(87) [

. . . .

- ?a

i ~ i a s"aiamP[(e)

] . YU .[

[

. . . . . . .

]

. . . . . . . . . . 1

[The following traces of the last thirteen lines of the Fifth Tablet are
taken from the reverse of K. 11,64r and from the reverse of I<. 8,526.' I

(130) [
(131) [
(132) [

.
.
.
.
.

(133) [

. . . . . . .

(134) [

. . . .

(135)[
(136)[
(137) [

. . . .

(138) [
(139) [
(140) [

. .

(128) [
(129) [

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

. . . - z - [ .
. ] - s"u - 1 2 2 ~- ti 72% - [
. . -b]a-Su e - [ .
. I - s u - x u - ti [ .
- Su - n]u Lu 4% - [

]
]

. . .
. . . 1
. . . I
. . . ]

i - 8nb - bu[ - u]
] s h m ~ ( e ) ~[ . . . . . . . ]
] m a - a - r n - k [ y ~ - z ~.n . . . ]

.

i]lZlzi

. 1-

. . . .

] u

ni

it

-

. . . . . 1

[

- bal - li - i[$ .

7~zeI-lam-7ne mi-[
] La uum - [ .

. . .

]

. . . . I
US-[ . . . ]

. . .
. . ] nu- [ . . . ]
. . . . . . . . . . . ] n i - i - 72%

The reverse of K. 8,526 gives traces of the last three lines of
the text; the greater part of the traces are taken from the reverse
of K. 11,641. The obverse of K. 11,641gives portions of 11. 14-22;
for the text, see Appendix 11.
a T h e reading SarnZte) is probable; there is not room on the
tablet for the restoration "'[El-a.

a5

THE COMPLAINT OF T I I E GODS.

(83) Then he fixed a station for it [ .
(84) Now after the fate of [ . . .
(85) [ H e set] a throne [ . . . .
(86) [ .
] in heaven [ .
(8j)[ . . . . 1 . . [ . . .

. . . . 1
. . . . ]
.

.

.

1

1
. . . . I

[The following traces of the last thirteen lines of the Fifth Tshlet are
taken from the reverse of I<. 11,641and from the reverse of I<. 8 , 5 2 6 . ' ]

(128) " [
(129) " [
(130)"[
(131) " [
(132) " [

[
(134) [

( I 33)

(135)
(136)
(13j )
(138)
(139)
(140)

. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .
. . . . .

...

] their [

]him[
] them [
]him[
]them [

....

. . . . . 1"
.
.
. 1"
. . . . . I"
. . . . . I"

] may [

. . . . ]"

. . . . . . . . . 1 the gods spalte,

. . . . . ] the heavens [ . . . ]
[ . . . . your ] son [ .
. . ]"
. ] hath he [ . . . . ] "
[ . . . ] our [ .
[ . . . . ] he hath caused to live [ . . . . ]
" [ . . . . ] splendour [ . . . . 1
" [ . . . . . ]not [ . . . . . 1
" [ . . . . . . . ]we[ . . . I!"
:3

"
"

"

"

"
"

I n the speech that follows it may be conjectured that the gods
complained that, although Marduk had endowed the heavens with
splendour and had caused plants to live upon the earth, yet there
were no shrines built in honour of the gods, and there were no
worshippers devoted to their service; see below, p. 88, notc I .

I . "'

Marduk

zzk

-

ri

iZEni

ilza

[ ~ b ] ~ - b lai lb - b a - S n i - b a n - n u - a

2.

3, [ i p ] - & ~ p i - i - S u

a - ~ z a *"E-a

Se

-

mi

-

fa

1

[nik-la-a-tila

[i

- znk

- Ray]

4. [fa] iza lib-bi-iu US-ta-gnu-u i-nam-din [ana fa-a-SZL]"

6. ZW-US-ziz-ma anz?Za(a) ln

7. la - ub - ni - mn

amFla(a)

a

.

. . ]
- u . . [ . . . ]
a - sib
[ . , . ] 'O

5 . da-mi7 lu-uk-rur-ma i:-;ri-im-[tu]ms Zu - [

@

The end of the line has been restored from the catch-line of
Tablet V, preserved by K. 8 , 5 2 6 ; the traces upon-I<. 3,567, etc.,
suggest the reading ina ie-[nzli-[e-Yu]; K . 11,641 reads [i]na

de-me-[

. . 1.

Conjectural restoration.
For this restoration, cf. Tablet IV, 1. 136.
T h e beginning of the sign i is visible.
One sign only is missing at the beginning of the line.
Conjectural restoration.
I t is possible that the final vowel of da-mi is not the i of the
I sing. pron. suffix; in that case the phrase should be translated
"Blood will I take." I n view of the fact, however, that, according
to Berossus, BE1 first formed mankind from his own blood mixed with
earth, it appears to me preferable to take the i as the pron. suffix
and translate da-mi as " my blood!'
Berossus does not state that
BBI used his own hone for forming man, and this agrees with the
a

"

I.
2.

When Marduli heard the word of the gods,'
His heart prompted him and he devised [a cunning
plan].3

3. H e opened his mouth and unto E a [he spake],

4. [That whichI5 he had conceived in his heart he

imparted [unto him] :
5. " My blood ' will I take and bone h i l l I [fasl~ion],~
6. " I will make man, that man may

7.

"

. . [ . . .

1.

I will create man who shall inhabit [the earth],1o

absence of thepronominal suffix from i?-si-irn-[tulm. According
to my rendering of the line, Mardulr states his purpose of forming
man from his own blood, and from bone which he will create; see
further, the Introduction.
T h e traces of the last sign of the word appear to be those of
turn. I think there can be no doubt that is-$i-rjn-[tu]mcorresponds
to the Hebrew ' e ~ e r n ,"bone," which is employed in Gcn. ii, 23, in
the phrase 'esern m?'b;6rnui, "bone of my bones." I n connection
with the feminine form of the word 4-scim-[tulrn, it may be noted
that, in addition to the plnr. 'iigimim, the fem. form 'd~dmbthis also
found.
T h e verb may perhaps be restored as lu-[ub-nil, as suggested
in the translation.
lo The last word of the line may perhaps be restored as ir:ilLjiz,
as suggested in the translation.

88

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VI.

8. Zg-u e n - d i ~ d u l Zu L Z ~ ~ I - ~S uJ -Zn U
u Zu-u pa-$a ['

...]

l f - t e - ~ i S * Iu k z 1 6 - 6 ~ - t u - ~ i z aa-~n n /illz-xiz lu-u [

...]

10.

'

T h e word is probably papahu: literally the line reads, "Let
the service of the gods be established, and as for them let [their]
shrines [be built]."
I t is interesting to note the reason that is
here implied for the creation of mankind, i.e., that the gods may
have worshippers. There is clearly a reference to this in 1. 29 of
the Seventh Tablet, where, after referring to Marduk's mercy upon
the gods, his enemies, the text goes on a-nu pa-di-iu-nu i6-nu-u
a-me-lu-fu, " F o r their forgiveness did he create mankind."
a I t is probable that the end of the line contained some
expression parallel to al-ha-kn-ti.
I t seems to me preferable to assign to the Pie1 of [kaiiZlu] its
usual meaning " t o oppress," rather than to rcnder the passage as

That the service of the gods may be established,
and that [their] shrines ' [may be built].
9.. " But I will alter the ways of the gods, and I will
change [their paths] ;
10. " Together shall they be o p p r e s ~ e d ,and
~ unto
evil shall [they . . . . I."
I I . And E a answered him and spalie the word :
I 2. " [ . . . . ] the [ . . . . 1 of the gods
I have [changed]
13.[ . . . . ] .
andone . [ .
]
14. [ . . . shall be deJstroyed7 and men will I
8.

[ . . . . I
. . . . .

15. [
16.[.

. .

. . .
I S . [ .
. .
17. [
19. [
20.
21.

. . .

[ .
[ .

. .

] and the gods [ . . . . . ]
. ] . . and they [ . . . . ]
] . . andthegods[ . . . . ]
. . ] . . . . [ . . . . ]
. . . . ] thegods [ . . . . ]
] the Anunnalri [ .
]
. . . . I . . . [ . . . . ]
.-

T h e sense seems to b e that
Together shall they he honoured!'
Marduk, by the creation of man, will establish the worship of the
gods, but at the same time will punish the gods for their complaints.
I t is possible that in his speech that follows Ea dissuades hlarduk
from carrying out the second part of his proposal.
The signs at the beginning of the line are not very clear.
T h e signs read as ut, SaZ, and &I are probably not to be taken as
the single character Jb.
Vossibly, " I have [related]."
Possibly [n]a.
' The word is conjecturally restored.

"

go

CREATION S E R I E S , T A B L E T VI.

'

[The rest of the text is wanting with the exception of the
last few lines of the tablet, which read as follows.]

. . . .

.
]
142. i - n a Up-?u-&kin-na-kn us"- la - a d - [ . . . . ]
143. {a ma-ru &a?-ra-du mu-ti? [gi-mil-Lz-Su- . . . ]
I

i

d

- [

]-mu - u

144. n i - i - n u s'a x u - n i - n u u l - l u - [
145. u-s'i-bu-ma

ina

pu/iri-Su-nu

[

. . . . .

]

. . .

]

i-nam-6%-[

' I t is probable that the missing portion of the text corresponded
closely with the account of the creation of man and animals given
by Berossns; for a further discussion of this subject, see the
Introduction. T h e tablet K. 3 , 3 6 4 [Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. 2 9 f.)
has been thought to belong to the Creation Series, and to contain
the instructions given by Marduk to man after his creation. Had
this been so, it would have formed part of the Sixth Tablet. On
plates lxivff. of Vol. I1 is published the text of a Neo-Babylonian
tablet, No. 33,851, which gives a duplicate text to K. 3 , 3 6 4 ; and
in Appendix I1 I have given reasons for believing that the text
inscribed upon K. 3 , 3 6 4 and No. 33,851 has no connection with

THE LAST ASSEMBLY OF THE GODS.

9I

[The rest of the text is wanting' with the exception of the
last few liner of the tablet, which read as follows.]

I . [

138. [ . . . . . . . .
. . . . I
139.[. . . . . . . . ] . [ . . . .
140. When [ . . . . . ] . [ . . . . ]
141. They rejoiced [ .
] .
[ . . . 1
142. In Upiuklcinnaku they set [their dwelling].
143. Of the heroic son, their avenger, [they cried] :
144. " We, whom he succoured, . . [ . . . ] ! "
145. They seated themselves and in the assembly they
named [him . . . . 1 1
146. They all [cried aloud
they exalted [him . . . 1.'

I

(?)I,

the Creation Series, but is part of a long composition containing
moral precepts. Another fragment which it has been suggested
belongs to one of the later tablets of the Creation Series is
K. 3,445 R. 396 (Cun. Texts, part xiii, pl. zq f. ; cf. also its
duplicate K. 14,949.pl. 24) ; but there are strong reasons against
the identification of the text as a fragment of the series Enuma
eliJ, though it may well be part of a parallel version of the Creation
story (see further, Appendix 11).
T h e address of the gods to Marduk forms the subject of the
Seventh Tablet of the series.

+

I.

' A a -

&-rib

m i - i t [

?nu-kin

iz-ra-ti] 2

2.

b a - n u - u Se-am u h i - e m u - i [ e - : i w r - h i - t i I 3

3. "" Asaru-alim fa ina bit mil-hi hub-t[u a-tar nziZ-hi14

4. iZi?zi

u - tak

- &u

-

u

a

- d [ i ~.

. .

. 1%

5. '"'Asaru-alim-nun-na ka-ru-6u nu-ur [a-bi a-lz-di-S~~]"

7. Su-u-ma
8.Sa

[

. . . .

1

.$egaZZu8 u s - f a g [

. . . .

]

xa-nin-s'u-nu

Sw-Ku-us-su

mu-ud-du-u

92,629 (catch-line), me-n'[;- . . 1.
The end of the line has been restored from the commentary
S. I I
S. 980, Obv., col, i, 11. 4 and 5 ; see Appendix I.
Restored from S. 1 1 , etc., Obv., col. i, 11. 9 and l o ; see
Appendix I.
Restored from S. I I , etc., Obv., col. i, 11. I j and 16, which
gives the words at-ru and mil-Ru as occurring at the end of the
line ; the restoration at-ru mil-ki-b, "whose counsel is mighty,"
is also possible.
T h e end of the line may perhaps be restored from the

' No.

+

~

I.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

0 Asari, " Bestower of planting," "[Founder of
sowing],"
" Creator of grain and plants," "who caused [the
green herb to spring up] ! "
0 Asaru-alim, "who is revered in the house of
counsel," "[who aboundeth in counsel]," *
T h e gods paid homage, fear [tooli hold upon
them] !
0 Asaru-alim-nuna, "the mighty one," " the
Light of [the father who begat him],'?
" Who directeth the decrees of Anu, Bel, [and

E,

I.

I"?

.

7. H e was their patron, he ordained [their . . . . ] ;
8. He, whose provision is abundance, goeth forth
[ . . . . I!
9. Tutu [is]I0 " H e who created them anew ; "
commentary S. 1 1 , etc., in some such way as a-d[ir i-$u-us-sunu-ti] ; see Appendix I.
The restoration is taken from the astrological fragment,
No. 32.574, Obv., I. 3 ; see Appendix 111.
Conjectural restoration.
No. 91,139 93,073, hzgaZZa(la).
a NO. 91,139, etc., u - U S - ~ [ i ] .
lo Restored from the commentary R. 366+80-7-19,
288+293;
Obv., 11. 1-4 (see Appendix I). T h e title Tutu is there explained
as ba-a-nu, "creator," while its two component parts (TU TU)
occur in the Sumerian version of the line as the eqnivalents of
b a - n u ~ uand e-di-Su.

'

+

+

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

94
I .

ill

I I.

lib

sa-gi-Sn-nu-ma 1

-

ni

-

ma3

?$tz

Su-nu

ZZL-n [pa-a:-&nil

ilZni

li

-

[nu

-

ku]

14. ,%a-am-man ina ilriniSg fu-a-fulo /a u71z-[vzaS-Ja.ln]
15.

'"'Tu-tu

16. Sa

u

""Zi-nitkin-na 1'

- Kin - nu

an '3

17. al-Rat-su-nn i:-ba-tn-ma"
18. a i

im-ma-&

' No. 91,139,

i-nu16

nu&?-ti
ilZni

am-ma-ni [i/Zni]l a
;amj(e)

a-pa-ti'?

el

.

.

$-Je-ta-[Su

.

u-ad-dn-u [

- lz~- [ti]
. . IL5

..

.

1:s

etc., sag-gi-b-nu-ma.
Lines 1 0 - 1 2 have been conjecturally restored from the
commentary R. 366, etc., Obv., 11. 5-18 (see Appendix I ) ; the
sentences I take as conditionals. For another occurrence of the
verb sagzl (I. lo), see Tablet IV, I. 12.
No. 91,139, etc., [li-i]6-[nli-ma.
No. 91,139. etc., dip-ti.
No. 91, r39, etc., [alg-gi-is'.
No. 91,139, etc., iu-u.
No. 91,139, etc., i-napu-bur.
I t is probable that another precative came at the end of the
line, and if this was so the verb was given in 1. 24 of the Obv. of
the commentary R. 366, etc. I n No. 91,139, etc., not very much
is wanting at the end of the line.
No. 91,13q, etc., ma-am-ma-an i-na iliini.
NO. 91,139, etc., fa-a-lu.

THE HOMAGE OF THE GODS TO MARDUIC.

95

lo. Should their wants be pure, then are they
[satisfied] ; '
I I. Should he make an incantation, then are the gods
[appeased] ;
1 2 . Should they attack him in anger, he withstandeth
[their onslaught] !
13. Let him therefore be exalted, and in the assembly
of the gods [let him . . . . ] ;
14. None among the gods can [rival him] !
15. Tutu is Zi-ulikina, "the Life of the host [of the
gods],"
16. Who established for the gods the bright heavens.
17. H e set them on their way, and ordained [their
path
;
18. Never shall his [ . . . . ] deeds be forgotten among men.

(?)I

No. 35,506, "'Zi-ukkin.
The end of the line is conjecturally restored from I<. z,1o7+
K. 6,086, Ohv., col. ii, I. 29 (see pl. Ixii), which explains the
title 'is' ZI-UKKIN as nap-Ja:alnap-har ilEui#'.
l3 No. 35,506 and K. 8,522, a-nu.
"
'0.
35,506. 2:P-ba-tu-u.
'"ome
such word as ur-&-&-nu should possibly he restored
at the end of the line ; for a fragment of the commentary to the
line, see Appendix I.
" K. 8,522, inn.
" K. 8,522 and No. 35,506, a-pu~u-ti.
According to S. I r
S. 980, Ohv., col. ii, 1. 7, a word
hu-u[l- .
. ] occurred at the end of the line, hut this is not
certain, as the commentary evidently gives a variant reading for
the beginning of the line (see Appendix I ) ; Jensen's suggested
~estorationis disproved by No. 35,506 (see pl. xlvi).
"

la

.

+

g6

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

iZ

20.

2 7 . Sa

sh-a-ri

an 22

(a-a-hi

iZdni

68-el

la!-me-e

k a - m u - tis3 i v - !n

7~

-u

7i~a-~~a-ri~

la - a i -

YU 24

28. a$-fa-na en-du25 U-?a-as-xi-ku 26 eli ildniP2T nn-hi-vi-x"u9s

'

T h e text of the commentary read mu-kin, i.e. "the Fonndcr of
Purification " ; for other variant readings in the line, see Appcndix I.
T h e text of 11. zo and Z I corresponds to that of the
commentary.
u is omitted by Nos. 91,139 93,073 and 35,506.
.
No. 9 I, I 39, etc., &egnlla(la).
NO. 91, I 39, etc., [mi-i]n~-ma-n[i].
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., i-si.
' No. 91,139, etc., ma-a-di-e.
NO. 91,139. etc., [p]u-uY-/Eu [daln-nu ; No. 35,506 reads
[pu-u]s'-ka and omits the adjective.
No. 35,506, ni-$i-ni.
'O Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., .bar-s'u.
" NO. 35,506, li-it-fa-'-id.
NO. 91.I39, etc., Zi-id-lu-lu; No. 35,506, li-id-[ . . .
I3 K. 8,522, here and in 11. 33, 41, and 43, reads i
h
a (i.e.
~
~

'

+

. 1.

~

T H E TITLES OF MARIIUIC.

97

19. Tutu
20.

2 I.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

as Zi-azag thirdly they named, "the
Bringer ' of Purification,"
" The God of the Favouring Breeze," " the Lord
of Hearing and Mercy,"
" T h e Creator of Fulness and Abundance," " t h e
Founder of Plenteousness,"
" W h o increaseth all that is small."
" I n sore8 distress we felt his favouring breeze,"
Let them say, let them pay reverence, let them
bow in humility before him !
Tutu as Aga-azag may manlcind fourthly magnify!
" T h e Lord of the Pure Incantation," " the
Quickener of the Dead,"
" Who had mercy upon the captive gods,"
" Who removed the yoke from upon the gods his
enemies,"

T u f u ) , which is written in small characters on the edge of the
tablet.
No. 35,506, i-nu.
'' Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, n'-di-i.
'@
No. 91,139, etc., $a.
" No..g1,139, etc., ti.
No. 91,139, etc., 6Zl.
" No. 91,139, etc., s'$-ti; No. 35,506, [;]i-ip-ii.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., el-li-fi.
No. 35,506, Z[i-it].
az an is omitted by No. 91,139, etc.
No. 91,139, etc., f u ; No. 35,506, furn.
." No. 91,139, etc., ri.
'' No. 35,506, di.
" No. g r , 39,
~ etc., ha.
'' Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., e-li ilzni.
NO. 91,139. etc., Ea.

"

98
-

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.
- --

29. a - n n

pa-di-s'u-nu'
i
n a-me-lu-tu2
30. v i - m e 3 - n u - u s;l: ~ U L ~ - Z U - ? U 6 a - J I u - u i t - t i - J " U

31. L i - k n - n u - m a

33. "' Tu-tu
34. Sh

ai

inz- m a - i a - a

"'MU-azag

inas

a - 712n - t u - f u

&anSi(Si)" a - a

s'u

elL71 l o

pa-Si-na " Lit -tad-6al
ina Sipti-s'u l 3 eZZitign(ti7n)l4 is-su-&u en-gab Z i w - % ~ - t i ' ~

35. "'.fag-zu mu-di-e Lid-di ilrini*' Sa i - b a r - ~ u - u ' ~ a v - S n

37. mu-kin

pu&vil'

s'a

iiani

[

...

.

.

38. m u - kau - nzs"Q La m a - gi - [~,i
39. m u - sb - i i v k i t - ti nu - [ .
40. s'a sn - a r - ti
u
K[i - , .

' See above, p. 8 8 , note
'
'
'O

"

L]ib'8-6i-iu-un

.

.

.

,

.

,

,

.

,

.

.

,

,

. I
,
I

I.

No. 35,506, a-me-lu-ti; No. 91,139, etc., a-me-lu-ut-ium.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., mi.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139,etc., 6u-ul.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,134,etc., i-nu.
NO. 9 1 , 1 3 9 . etc., &&$a-[d]u.
Literally, " the black-headed ones."
NO. 35,506, [ i l - n a .
No. 35.506, ha-an-du ; No. 91,139, etc., Ea-arm- . . .
No. 35,506, el-1%.
No. 9 1 , 1 3 9 , etc., $[a]-a-&-nn.

1

1.

99

THE TITLES OF MARDUIC.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

For their forgiveness ' did he create manlrind,"
" T h e Merciful One, with whom it is to bestow
life ! "
May his deeds endure, may they never be forgotten
I n the mouth of mankind7 whom his hands have
made !
Tutu as Mu-azag, fifthly, his " Pure Incantation "
may their mouth proclaim,
" Who through his Pure Incantation hath destroyed all the evil ones ! "
"". . . . .""
Sag-zu, who linoweth the heart tcf.-&!&t~.c)dsSSS
" who seeth through the innernmy gar&! !
':
.
" "-1.
'
" T h e evil-doer he hath not c 2 a s ~ tto~ g o fofth..
:-"
:'".:: *.
. " Z"'""".* .. . .""."
wit11 him ! "
- - " . *'.:"-" "
" Founder of the assembly of the gods," "[who
. . . . ] la their heart! "
" Subduer of the disobedient," "[
. . . .
" Director of Righteousness," " [
. . . .
" Who rebellion and [ . . . . . . . . ] ! "

"

.....:
...... "

" I

37.
38.
39.
40.

r!
.-.""""

"

I

"

"

I

"

1""

I!"
I,,,

No. g i , ~ j getc.,
,
bit.
NO. 91,139, etc., s'$-ti-L~.
' No. 91,139, etc., el-lj-[ . . ] ; No. 3 5 , 5 0 6 , [ . . . 1-Zi-ti.
No. 91,139, etc., fu.
" No. 35,506, ib-ru[ . . . 1.
" No. 91,139. etc.,pu.uk [ru]; the scribe has omitted the r u b y
mistake.
'' Jensen suggests the restoration [ m u - l i - $ 1 , i.e., "[who
gladdened] their heart."
No. 91,139, etc., xi-i;.
la

l3

.

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

100

41. " ' [ T u - t u ]

.

""Zi-si mu-SatL-[

42. ?nu - uh .his"

fu . mur

43. "'"[Tu- tu] ""Sz'h - hur

-

m

- tu

Jal-

fis"3

.

[

.

na

- si[/l

.

]

. 1'

.

ai - bi]

.[sap]- p i .i& [hilp .di .Su - nu [ . . . . 1
45. m[u .ball - Li
[nap - /l]ar rag - g [ i .
]
1-lu [ .
]
4 6 . [ . . . . ] lis'-[ .
44. m u

47.[

. . . .

]

i

~ [ .i

. . . . . . . . .

]

[The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 12,830,~but
their position in the text is uncertain.]

.""

"

"

b?;;pj?.k%&
....- m - a - te]
..I

saZ-?uat [ka@adi ib-ni-ma]

T h e reading of K. 9,267, I think, is Sat rather than &.
T h e end of this line may perhaps he restored from R. 2,107,
etc., col. ii, 1. 30 (see pl. lxii and Appendix I), as nu-si-@;a-bu-ti,
"who destroyed the mighty!'
This does not appear to agree with 11. 2 5 and 33, but the
reading of K. 9,267 is clear.
T h e sign following nu is broken, but the reading si$ is possible.
O n K. 2,107, etc., col. ii, 1. 3 1 the title Sub-liur is explained as
mu-baf-lu-uai-bi, and, though the following lines give explanations
of other titles, they contain the synonymous expressions nzu-bal-lu-u

THE TITLES O F MARDUIC.

I01

41. Tutu as Zi-si, " the [ . . . . . . . . 1,
42. " Who put an end to anger," "[who . . . . I ! " "
43. Tutu as Sub-liur, thirdly,' "the [Destroyer of
the foe],"
44. " Who put their plans to confusion," "[ . . . .
45. " Who destroyed all the wicked," " [ . . . .
46. [ . . . . . ] let them [ . . . . . . I !
47. [ . . . . . . ] . . [ . . . . . I

I,"
I,"

[The following lines are taken from tlie fragment I<. r2,830,~but
their position in the tent is uncertain.]

[He named the four quarters (of the world)],
mankind [he created],'
l8
[And upon] him understanding [ .

[ . . . . . I . . [ . . . . .

. I
[ .
] Tiamat [ . . . . . . I
[ . . . . . . I . [ . . . . . . I
[ .
] distant [ . . . . . . I
I . . . .] m.a y [ . . . . . . 1
nap-bar ai-6i nu-si-i/i rag-gi and nu-si-ih nap-har rag-g1' (see pl. lxii
and Appendix I).
T h e traces of the sign on K. 9,267 are those of kip, not a.
That the fragment K. 12,830 belongs to a copy of the Seventh
Tablet is proved by the correspondence of its first two lines with
the fragment of the commentary K. 8,299, Rev. (see pl. Ix). Its
exact position in the gap between 11. 47 and 105 is not certain.
" T h e line has been conjecturally restored from the commentary
K. 8,299, Rev., 11. 3-6 ; see Appendix I.
T h e first part of the line has been restored from the
commentary K. 8,299, Rev., 11. 7-9 ; see Appendix I.

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII

I02

[The following lines are taken from the fragment I<. 13,761.'1

. . . . . . . . . . . .
( 1 0 ) ~ * ~ .' [ . . . . . .
m b - bu [ . . . . . .
A - [ l. . . . . . .
6~ .nu - u [+itim(tzia) ' .
' " Z u ./u?n - mu ad - di - [ .
[

na

. din

mil

.R i

u

. . . . . . I
. . . . ]
. . . . . 1
. . . . I"
.
. 1
. . . . . . ]
irzinz-nz[a .
. . . ]

'"'Mu .urn - mu ba .a[?z

.

.
.
.
.

.

.
. I"
-Mu .Zzl Sam~(e) [ . . . . . . . . . . ]
s"a ana du - nn - ni - [ .
.
. 1
di*Gis'- KuI Z z t - (la - [ .
.
.
. ]
( 1 0 )a - bit
iLZniP' [ . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
""LlkgnZ .a6 .[ . . . . . . . . . . . 1
;a i - n u [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
""Pap - [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Sa Gza [ . . . . . . . . . . . 1
"'[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
' That the fragment K. 13,761 belongs to a copy of the Seventh
Tablet is proved by the correspondence of its fourth, fifth, sixth,
seventh, eighth, and ninth lines with the commentary I<. 4,406,
Rev., col. i (pls. liv f., and see Appendix 1). As the sixth line
preserved by the fragment is the first line of the reverse of the
tablet, it may be concluded that its place is about in the middle
of the text. T h e arrangement of the text, however, upon different
copies of the same tablet varies considerably, a large spacc being

TIIE TITLES OF MARDUII.

103

[The following lines are taken from the fragment K. 13,76r.'l

[
(IO)~[

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I

T h e mighty one [ . . . . . . . . . ] ! "
Agijl .
. . . . . . .
" T h e Creator of [the earth . . . . . I ! "
Zulummu
.
[ . . . . . . . . 12
" T h e Giver of counsel and of whatsoever
[ . . . . ]!"
Mummu, " the Creator [of . . . . . . ] i n "
Mulil, the heavens [ . . . . . . . . I
.
.
. "
" Who for
[ .
GiSkul, let [ . . . . . . . . . . . 1,
(10) " Who brought the gods to naught [ . . . . ]
!"
Lugal-ab-[
. . . . . . . . . . . 1,
"Whoin[ . . . . . . . . . . . . I!"
Pap-[ . . . . . . . . . . . . .
" W h o in [ . . . . . . . . . . . .
"

I,"

I!

I 2

I!"

[

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I

sometimes left blank at the end of the reverse; thus the reverse of
the copy of the Seventh Tablet, of which K. 8,519 is a fragment
(see p. roq f.), begins at a different point.
a I n the margin of the fragment I<. 1 3 , 7 6 1 every tenth line is
indicated by the figure " lo."
For the commentary to this line, see Appendix I.
Restored from the commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. i, 1. 9.
6 The commentary K. 4,qo6 presupposes a variant reading for
this line; see Appendix I.

104

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII

[The following lines are taken from the fragment I<. 8,519 and its
duplicate I<. 13,337; 1 this portion of the tent was not
separated by much from that preserved by K. 13,76r,?]

-

[ .
. . . . . . . . . ] tiuz
[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . h ] i . 7x8 - Sa
- bar he - l i ~ n
[ . . . . . . . . . . . ~z]<rp
[ . . . . . . . S a - & a ] - a e-7izu-ka-Su4
[Lugal-dur-ma&Sar in]ar"[k]as i l z r ~ i p 'be-el dur-ma-hi6
Sa

inn

[;a18

ina

Su - hat

S ~ Y Y -U-u ti

ilaizi*'

7na

S w - bu

- ' - diS

;i

- u7
- ru

[""A-du-nulz-nu18 ma-lik ""'E-a ba-an ilini" a62"-fz~
a

a

-

a ]

taL

-

Zak

- ti

Y/L

-

- ti

~ Z L

-

&L

' That the fragments I<. 8,519 and K. I 3,337 belong to two
copies of the Seventh Tablet is proved by their correspondence
with the commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii (pl. livf.).
This is clear from the fact that col. i of the reverse of
K. 4,406 gives the coinirrcntary to the earlier lines preserved by
the preceding fragment, I<. 13,761. T h e three columns of the
commentary, parts of which are preserved on one side of K. 4,406,
are probably cols. i, ii, and iii of the reverse of the tablet; if this
is so, it follows that the lines on I<. 8,519 and I<. 13,337 follow
those on K. 13,761. But, as it is possible that I<. 4,406 gives the
last three columns of the obverse of the tablet, a conjectural
numbering of the lines of the text has not been attempted.
With the phrase [ . . . . n]ap.har be-l<~n,compare the
explanations of a title of Marduk given by K. 2,107 K. 6,086
(see pl. lxi and Appendix I), Obv., col. ii, I. 5 , [
1
nap-har 6e-li a-?a-rzo! nap-har be-12; " [The
1 of all lords,
the Chief of all lords."
T h e commentary I<. 4,406 presupposes a variant reading for

+

. . .

. . . . .

THE TITLES OF MARDUIC.

I"$

[The following lines are taken from the fragment IC. 8,519 and its
duplicate I<. 13.337;' this portion of the tent war not
separated by much from that preserved by K. 13,761.']

L . .

. . . . . . . . . I . . . .

[ .
" the Chief (?) of] all lords,"
[ .
supreme] is his might !
[Lugal-durmab, " the King]' of the band of the
gods," " the Lord of rulers," '
" Who is exalted in a royal habitation," '
" [Who] a
among the gods is gloriously
supreme ! "
[ A d u - n ~ n a ] , ~'' the Counsellor of Ea," who
created the gods his fathers,
Unto the path of whose majesty
this line ; cf. Appendix I. With the phrase given in the text,
which is repeated ten lines lower down, compare the explanation
of a title of Mardnk on K. 2,107, etc., 1. 16, he-lum Ja e-mu.&-a-Iu
Sa-ha-a, "The Lord whose might is supreme."
For the restoration of the beginning of the line from the
commentary K. 4.406, Rev., col. ii, 11. 8 ff., see Appendix I.
T h e word d u r m u ~ uwas employed as a Babylonian priestly
title. I t may here he rendered by some such general phrase as
" ruler," unless it is to be taken as a proper name.
' This line and the one that follows it are rather shorter than
usual, hut, according to the commentary I<.4,406 (see Appendix 11),
nothing appears to be missing at the beginning of either. I t may
he noted that the arrangement of the four lines that follow differs
on the duplicate K. 13,337.
Conjectural restoration.
This line and the two which follow it are restored from the
commentary K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 11. 23 ff. (see Appendix I) ;
for the title ""A-du-nun-nu, cf. also K . 2,107, etc., 1. 20.
@

106

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

l[a

-

a

u]

. .

[
[

. .
, . . .
. . . ,

[

. .

[

,

-

mas'

-

]

Dul

.
.

s'a

-

-

Lu

azag

ilu
u

-

ai

-

ta

urn - 7na

-

r(u -

Szc

. . . Ju] - bat - su el - Zit
. ]-bar la &as-su "'"~u/=a~-du/-az~g-ga

.

. . .

,

. . .

- ] a -b i - h a

ta-ha-zi

[The numbering of the followi~~g
liner is based on Llle uarginzll
numbers upon No. y1,139+ 93,073.']
10s.

[

106. [

. . . .
. . . .

108. ma-a

.

]

h[a (?)

.

. .

.

.

] sh - a - Su

-r]u kakhaba { [ a i-ua Ja-me-e Su-@u-u]

s'n Kir-his"' Ti-amat i-tibs-hi-[ru la aa-i-&~]"

' See pls. XI, xlii f.
T h e end of the line has been restored from S. I I , etc., Rev.,
col. ii, 11. 3-6 (see pl. lii and Appendix I).
No. 91,139, etc., [hi-i]t.
rib-arhiit is written RUN-SAG-GIon NOS. 35,506, 91,139, etc.,
and I<. 8,522. T h e expression r2$u-sic-arkat,literally "the beginning
-the future," may be taken as implying Marduli's complete control
over the world, both at its creation and during its subsequei~t
existence. I t is possible that Su-nu is the pronominal suffix afid
should be attached to the preceding word, i.e. r6u-arkiitu-Su-nu,
' I their beginning and future," that is, "the beginning and future of
mankind."

107

THE TITLES OF MARDUIC.

[No] god can ever attain !
[ .
.
. in] Dul-azag he made it ltnown,
[ .
. . . . . ] pure is his dwelling!
[ . 1. .
the .
] of those without
ulLderstanding is Lugal-dul-azaga !
[ .
] supreme is his might!
[ . , .
] their [ .
] in the midst
of Tiamat,
I
[ . I. . . . . . ] .
of the battle !

1.

[The numbering of the following lines is based on the marginal
numbers upon No. 91,139 t 93,073.']

IOS.[

106. [

. '. . . .
. . . . .

]
]

.

.

[

. . . . . ] him,

the star, which [shineth in

the 'heavens].%
107. May ' h e hold the Beginning and the Future,'
they pay homage unto him,
" H e who forced his way through the
midst of Tiamat [without resting],"

I.e., mankind.
Possil)!~restore pal-su-[u] or pal-su-[ni] ; it is also possible
that nothing is wanting. The meaning assigned to palusu in the
translation is conjectural.
No. 91,139, i-na KLr-hi.
NO. 91.139 appears to read f-/i[i (or { i ) . . .
The end of the line is restored from the commentaries S. 1 1 ,
etc., Rev., col. ii, 11. 19-21, and K. 2,053, Rev., col. ii, 11. 3-5
(cf. pls. lii and lix, and Appendix I).

1.

108

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

'

NO. 91,139, ZU-U.
Cf. Tablet V, 1. 6 ; No. 3 5,506, p]Ne-6i-n',
No. 35,506, a-hi-is.
I t is possible that in No. 35,506. Rev., 1. q (second half of the
line), an additional line of the text was inserted between 11. log and
I 10 of the text; it is also possible that the second half of the line
was left blank. From the traces upon the tablet it would seem
...
that at the end of 1. 109 the scribe has written his si of dlv~slon
three times.
6 No. 91,139, etc., Kakkndu.
K. 9,267 and Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., m i
For li-ki-il-lu the commentaries S . 11, etc., and K. 2,053 (see
Appendix I) give the variant reading lihin, i.e. " h e ordained their
paths!'
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ki-ma.
No. 91,139, etc., xu.
'" NO. 91,139, etc., ii-+-'-a.
I' T h e commentaries presuppose a variant text for the end of the
line (cf. Appendix I).
la No. 91,139, etc., Zi-ik-mi; No.. 35,506, [
. . . . -m]i
a

61

'

THE HOMAGE OF MANKIND TO MARDUIC.

109

109. " Let his name be Nibiru, 'the Seizer of the
Midst' !
I 10. " For the stars of heaven he upheld ' the paths,
I I 1. " H e shepherded all" the gods like sheep!
I 1 2 . " H e conquered Tiamat, he troubled and ended
her life," lS
I 13. In the future of mankind, when the days grow old,
114. May this be heard without ceasing, may it hold
sway lg for ever !
I 15. Since he created the realm (of heaven) 22 and
fashioned the firm earth,24
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., nu-pi;-fa-lu; K. 9,267, nanu-[pi;-fa-!a] ; the text of the commentary
S. I I, etc., also read napiftu. nasirlu, lit. "treasure," is evidently
to be taken in this passage as synonymous in meaning with napi!tu.
No. 91,139, etc., fa-as'.
NOS. .~
35,506 and q. l , ..
39,
~ etc., n'-is'.
" No. 35,506, u-mu.
" No. 91,139, etc., ii-is-si-e-ma; No. 35,506, li-is-si-e-[ .
1.
NO. 91,139, etc., lu.
lo NO. 91,139, etc., [li-r]i-ik, "may it endure."
No. 91,139. etc., a-$a].
No. 91,139, etc., al-!urn.
That alru, lit. " place," in
12 K. 9,267, r a ; No. 91,139, etc., m.
this passage refers to heaven is proved by the commentary R. 366,
etc., Rev., col. ii, 1. 3 f. (see pl. Ivii), which gives the equations
AN = a;-m, and a:-ru = ;aFa-mu-u.
No. 91,139, etc., ip-ti-&u; No. 35,506, - t i ; I<. 9,267,
[zj-flik.
" No. 35,506, n i ; No. 91,139, etc., nu. T h e commentary R.
366, etc. (see above, n. zz), I. 7 f., explains danninu as referring to
the earth by the equations KU = dun - x i - n i and dun - n i - nu =
i~~iIim(1im).
l3

I . . . 1,.i.e.

~

.

I10

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

118. i s " - m e - ma6

"'E - a

ha-bit-fa-;%

i-i-&-en- z u 7

19. 7?za - a s'a a6ep2- ?u 0 u - &r - ri - /zu ziil - r z ~- u -sir
120. : u - u
h i - m a i n - a - t i - ~ n a " " E - a Zu-z~ :u~?z-fu
i - h i p a r - s i - i n ha-Zi-S'L-nzr
li-biZ-7na10
lit'% tab - ha2
te - r i - t i - ia"
s"u - u
1 2 2 . giln - r i
123ina
zih-ri
@an&iAAN13
ikini
rabilti
I 24. hanSriAAN14&7n~*'-s"z15 iw-bu-u n-?'a-ti-YU ' 6 aL-kat-sz~~~
I

-

' Nos.

35,506 and 91,139, etc., '"'BZl rnzfifi.
No. 91,139, etc., a-6%.
T h e text of 11. I 16 and I I j corresponds to that followed by the
commentary R. 366, etc. (see Appendix I).
No. 91,139, etc., ina zik-ri.
No. 35,506, nu. The text of the commentary R. 366, etc., gave
a variant and fuller reading for the second half of thc line.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., i8-me-e-ma.
No. 91,139, etc., it-fa-an-gi. Lines 118-123 are omitted by
I<. 9,267, possibly by mistake, in consequence of zzk-n' occurring
at the beginning of I. I 17 and also of 1. 123.
NO. 91,139. etc., a6-bi-[el-tu.
"0s.
35.506 and 91,139, etc., zi-kir-lu.
"'0.
91,139, etc., li-6i-el-ma.

'

THE FIFTY TITLES OF MARDUIC.

III

T h e Lord of the World," the father BE1 hat11
called his name.
117. (This) title, which all the Spirits of Heaven
pro~laimed,~
118. Did E a hear, and his spirit was rejoiced, (and
he said) : '
I 19. '' H e whose name his fathers have made glorious,
120. " Shall be even as I, his name shall be E a !
I 2 I . " T h e binding of all my decrees shall he control,
1 2 2 . " All my commands shall he make known! "
1 2 3 . By the name of "Fifty " did the great gods
1 2 4 . Proclaim his fifty names, they made his path
pre-eminent."
I

16.

125.

"

"

Let them20 be held in remembrance, and let the
first man proclaim them ;

No. 91,139,etc., te-yi-e-ti-ia.

" No. 91,139,etc.,

li-it.
NOS. 35,506 and 91,139,etc., H a - a n - b a .
l4 K. 9,267, [ . .
] - a ; No. 91,139,etc., [ . . . 1-&a.
"' 0s.
35,506 and 91,139, etc., Su-mi-e-Su.
l6 K. 9,267, u-In- ti^.
" From the commentary R. 366, etc., and the explanatory text
S. 747, it may he concluded that the Seventh Tablet, in its original
form, ended at I. 124. I t is probable that 11. 125-142 were added
as an epilogue at the time when the composition was incorporated
in the Creation Series (see Appendix I).
NO. 91,139,etc., [Zi-221-sa-ah-fu.
la No. 91,I 39, etc., [ma]-ah.
20 I.e., the names of Mardok.
l3

..

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

I12

127. l i - f a - a n - n i - m a
128. ;a
I 29.

--ia'rz'i6

z

li - ig - gi - nza

130. m a t - s u

a

- bn3

nu-ki-di7

a - na

Zi-&-&i-iz$

li-$at-fa-a

uz-nn-s"u-uu8

'"'b'?Z

lid-dz;'-s"a-a"

131. h i - n u - a t a - t n a t - s u

m a - ri4

iu-u

ihui

""Marduh

Zn"

Sal-ma12

la e - ~ a - a t ' ~h i - b i t L 4 - s u

132. ~ iit - p i - i - s"u la 71s"-te-pi-ill5 ilu a i - u r n - vza
133. i h - h i - Z i m - m u - m a 1 6 u l u - t a r - m ' 7

hi-fad-su'8

134. ina sa-ba-si-Su uz-za-Su u l i-ma&-&a?-& ilu ma-am-manL9

' Nos.

35,506 and 91,139, etc., insert the copula u.
NO. 9 I , 139, etc., mi-if-Ea-n:J ii-lin-tal-Ru.
No. 35,506, a-6a; K. 9,267 probably read a6u.
Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., ma-ri-i!; K. 9,267, mZri.
K. 9,267, lu-iu-&i.[
1.
' No.g1,r39,etc.,[
. I-;.
' K . 9,267, nu-kid; Nos. 35,506 and 91,139, etc., nu-hi-du.
K. 9,267, u ~ n d ~ ~ - J u.- [. 1; NO. 91,139, etc., us-ni-iu.
No. 91,139, etc., [ l ] a ig-[ . . . . 1.
NO. 91,139, etc.,.li-lil-[dil-ef-fa-a;I<. 9,267 and No. 35,506,

. . .
. . .

Ii-[

"

. . . . . 1.

K. 9,267 and No. 91,139, etc., lu-u.
No. 91,139, etc., !a-al-ma.

126. Let the wise and the understanding consider
them together !
127. Let the father repeat them and teach them to
his son ;
128. Let them be in the ears of the pastor and the
shepherd !
I 29. Let . a man rejoice in Marduk, the Lord of the
gods,
130. That he may cause his land to be fruitful, and
that he himself may have prosperity !
131. His word standeth fast, his command is unaltered ;
132. T h e utterance of his mouth hath no god ever
annulled.
133. H e gazed in his anger, he turned not his neck ;
134. When he is wroth, no god can withstand his
indignation.
135. Wide is his heart, broad2' is his compassion ;

K. 9,267, [ . . . . 1-nu-ta.
35,506. di-if.
'TO.
91,139, etc., uI-ie-pi-el-l[zr].
No. 35,506, [ . . .
-m]u-u.
" K. 9,267, [ u ] - f a r ; No. 91,139, ctc., u-la-7-i.
'I Il. 9,267, hi&&[
. 1.
I' K. 9,267, man-[
. .
No. 91,139, etc., [lz'l-id-6a-Su.
SO NOS. 35,506 and 9r,r39, etc. ; I<. 9,267, [?,]a-pa-&. K. 8,522
gives the variant reading &'-id, "firmly established (?) is his
compassion."
la So K. 9,267 ; I<. 8,522 reads ha[?]- n [ s - su] ; No. 35,506,
ka-ra-aha ; NO. 91,139, etc., ha-[ . . . . 1.
l3

"'0.

.

.

1.

8

lr4

CREATION SERIES, TABLET VII.

137. ta[h]- lillz - ti ma&
138 [
I 39.

[

. . .

-

] tnr [

. . . .

]-at

""

-u

. . .

id-bu-bu
]-Ran a-na

Marduh

-

pa - nu ui- i [ n ]
te-[

. . . .

]

[

. . . .

]

121-21 iL#ni

. . . .

1.
91,139, etc.; IC. 8,522,i-[
This is probably the last line of the tablet. It may here be
noted that, for the text of the Seventh Tablet given in the
preceding pages, only those fragments have been used which are
proved by the commentaries to contain missing portions of the
text. Several other fragments, which from their contents and style
of writing may possibly belong to copies of the text, have not been
' So K. 9,267 and No.

136. T h e sinner and evil-doer in

[ . . . .

his

presence

I.

137. They received instruction, they spalie before him,
138. [
. . . . . . . ] u n t o [ . . . . 1.
139. [ . . . . . ] of Marduk may the gods

[ . . . .

I;

140. [May] they [ . . . . his ] name [
141. [ . . . . ] they took and [ .
142. [
. . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .
. . .

1!

I;
. . . I!'

included. T h e text of one such fragment (S. 2,013) is of peculiar
interest and is given in Appendix I1 ; in 1. to f. it refers to Ti-amat
e-li-tiand Ti-amat f'p-li-ti, " T h e Ocean (Tiamat) which is ahove"
and " T h e Ocean (Tiamat) which is beneath," a close parallel to
" t h e waters which were ahove the firmament" and "the waters
which were under the firmament" of Gen. i, 7 ; see the Introduction.

Of&r Gccounfcz of f6e @icziort of
Creation,
1. @nofljer @ereion of tlje BSragon:@zflj+'
OH".
I . i-ta - an - /zn nhini"
ni?'?" d [ a - . . .
z. in
da - <a - a
izr.?~" e - [ , . .
3. a - na ih - kiL - li - Si - nn u1 [ , . .
4 a-7za r i i i z - n z n - t i - s i ' - 7 r n ul' i - s a 6 - [

-

-

-

. . . ]
. . . 1
. . . 1
. . . . ]

.

5 . man
iiu
urn - nza
~iru [ , . .
. .
6. tam - t u - unz - ina
u
[ .
. . .
7 ""Bd iizn Sam?(e) i - te - siv [ .
. . . .
8. 1, h a s - p u 711%-mh-.?u I h a s - j [ u . . . .

.
.

.

1
1
,I

I :'

' For the text, see Cunez;form Texts, part xiii, pl. 3 3 f., Rm. 2 8 2 ;
for a previous publication, cf. Delitzsch, Assyniches WOrfer6uih,
p. 390 f.: translations have been given by Zimmern in Gunkel's
Schb'pfung und Chaos, pp. q17ff., and by Jensen in Schrader'sKeiZins.
BdZ., vi, pp. qqff. Strictly speaking, the text is not a creation
legend, though it gives a variant form of the principal incident in
the history of creation according to the version I?nnnza elis'. I n the
tablet Rm. 282 the fight with the dragon did not precede the
creation of the world, but took place after men had been created
and cities had been built; see further the Introduction.
a T h e form of the name here used is T<im/u, "the Sea."
T h e kaspu is the space that can be covered in two hours
travelling, i.e., about six or seven miles. These general dimensions
of the size of the dragon are in accordance with the statement
made in 1. 8 f. of the reverse to the effect that after the dragon
had been slain his blood flowed for more than three years. T h e

1.
OBV.

I.
2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

@nofqer @eraion of fqe Brcson:@tttj.'

T h e cities sighed, men [ . . . . . . . 1.
Men uttered lamentation, [they . . . . .
For their lamentation there was none [to help],
For their grief there was none to take [them by
the hand].
Who was the dragon [ . . . . . . . .
l i a m a t was the dragon [ . . . . . . . 1 !
Be1 in heaven hath formed [ . . . . . . 1.
Fifty kaspu in his length, one liaspu this l~eigl~t],"
1 1

1'

second measurement in the line is taken by Zimmern to refer to
the dragon's breadth, but, as Jensen points out, this is not
consistent with the measurement of the mouth given in the
following line. Even Zimmern's readings of bo GAR in 1. 1 0 and
65 GAR in 1. 1 1 do not explain, but render still more anomaloos,
the & GAR in I. 9. Without going into the question of the probable
length of the Babylonian cubit, it is obvious that the dragon's
breadth can hardly have been given as so many miles, if its mouth
only measures so many feet. This difliculty can be got over by
restoring ;ri~zififuin place of the suggested rz~$r*ssu at the end of
I. 8. We then have a consistent picture of the dragon as a long
thin snake, rearing his head on high; his coils might well have
been believed to extend for three hundred or three hundred and
fifty miles, and the raising of his head in the air to a height of six
or seven miles would not be inconsistent with the measurement of
his mouth as six cubits, i.e., some ten feet or more across.

118

O T H E R ACCOUNTS OF CREATION

9 &
10. I

GAR

pi-i-S"U

GAR

l i - ma - a .t i

. . . . . 1
u [ .~ . . . . . . I
i-[ . . . . . . ]

I G A R

fa

[ .

V GAR i; . su - r i
1 2 . 2 - n a mipi IX amrnatu i - ? a d - d a - [ a d
lr.anal
13.

u-Se-&-hi

xi-im-bat-su

i-[

14. ilEni s'a iarna(e) Ra .li .Su .nu [
15.

]

. . . . . 1
. . . . . 1

iiza ?aiz?(e) ildnifld Ra-an-s"u ana pdn
Sa ""Sin i7za uliuni .s"u u r - ru .[

16. u

. . .

[

. . .

]

. . . . 1

?id]-i

. . . . ]
.
.
. ]
[ . . . . 1

.

]

z ~ . ? + l a - a - t ar a - p a - a s " - 2 . a s ' u - x i - b [ a
Sayrid . u . ta

22. u

e

-

pu

- us" [

23. fas'ju-ra-aiz-ni be-el dhl-fiu-ut4
zq. ul

i-di-e-ma

s'a

Lab-bi

[

[The rest of the Obverse and the upper part of the Reverse of the
tablet is ~ a n l i n g . ~ ]

' See Jensen,

Zfeilins. BibL, vi, p. 364 ; Zimmern takes the
upright wedge as part of the number, cf. the preceding note.
Lines 17-19 are the appeal of the gods to the Moon-god ;
11. 20-22 contain the address of the Moon-god to T i j h u ; and
11. z j ff. give Tisku's answer to the Moon-god.
For this value of the sign sug, cf. Briinnow, No. 3,013, and
Jensen, Keilirts.BibL, vi, p. 3 6 5

THE SIZE OF THE DRAGON.

119

g. Six cubits is his mouth, twelve cubits [his . . . . 1,
10. Twelve cubits is the circuit of his [ears . . . . ] ;
I I . For the space of' sixty cubits he [ . . . . 1 a bird ;
1 2 . I n water nine cubits deep he draggeth [ . . . . 1.
13. H e baiseth his tail on high [ . . . . . . 1 ;
14. All the gods of heaven [ . . . . . . . 1.
15. In heaven the gods bowed themselves down
before [the Moon-god . . . . 1;
16. The border of the Moon-god's robe they hasti[ly
grasped] :
17. " Who will go and [slay] the dragon,'
18. " And deliver the broad land [from . . . . 1,
19. " And become king [over . . . . . . ] ? "
2 0 . " GO, T i i l ~ u[slay]
,~
the dragon,
2 I . " And deliver the broad land [from . . . . 1,
2 2 . " And become king [over
. . . . . . ]!"
23. " Thou hast sent me, 0 lord, [to . . . . 1
the raging (creatures) * of the river,
24. " But I know not the [ . . . . ] of the Dragon ! "
[The rest of the Obverse and the upper part of the Revcrse of the
tablet are ~ a n t i n g . ~ ]

Jensen, n'-$u-ut, which he renders as "'moisture." T h e plural,
delhziti, may perhaps be explained by supposing that, according
to this version also, the dragon had other creatures to help her in
the fight.
Wf 11. z g and 26 the following traces are preserved : ( 2 5 )

[

.

.

. . .
. .

e ~ a p ~ [ .

]

oznb -?[a -

. .].

. . . . . 1,

(26)

[

. . . . .

]

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

I20

.

RE",
I.

[

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . ] pa-a-Su i-pu-uf-?%a a-nu '""[ . . .

5. u-Sa-(2s"-&it

ur-pn

6. Kza-nu-uR-hza nn-pif-ti-s"u i7za pa-ni-fza

7. is - su - kanz - 7nn

in6 - hi

8. IlI f ~ ~ n c i t i *I l~l u7,/lapt fi7lzu I

K""

[

za

]

. . ]
[ . . . . 1
. . . . . 1
[ . . . . I"

pni-&a-n [

.

.

.

' Jensen suggests the restoration '&'B[U],which he deduces
from the traces upon the tablet as published by Delitzsch ; for, as
he states, the only other restoration possible would he " ' I [ I f a r ] ,
and this is rendered unlikely by the masculine form of the
imperatives in 11. 2 and 4. This would prove that the slayer of
the dragon was B d , or Marduk, in both the versions of the story.
As a matter of fact, the traces are incorrectly given by Delitzsch ;
they represent the sign AN and not the conflate sign AN EN
(cf. Cun. Tzts., pt. xiii, pl. 34), and it is not possible to conclude
from the text who is the hero of this version.
a Jensen suggests the restoration u[ . KAS-PU], i.e., "for three
years, three months, a day and [ . hours]." The trace of the

+

THE SLAYING OF TIIE DRAGON.

REV.
I.

121

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[And . . . . ] opened his mouth and [spake]
unto the god' [ . . . . 1:
. .

Stir up cloud, and storm [and tempest]!
3. " T h e seal of thy life [shalt thou set] before thy
2.

"

face,
4. " Thou shalt grasp it, and thou shalt [slay] the
dragon."

5. H e stirred up cloud, and storm [and tempest],
6. H e [set] the seal of his life before his face,

j . H e grasped it, and [he slew] the dragon.
8. For three years and three months, one day and

[one night] '
9. T h e blood of the dragon flowed [ . . . . ] . 3

next character after u is the single diagonal wedge (cf. Cun. TxLs.,
pt. xiii, pl. 34) ; according to Jensen's restoration this sign can
"twenty hours," a not
only be the number " 10," i.e. X US-PU,
very probable reading. T h e diagonal wedge is more probably the
beginning of the sign MI, i.e. nzGSu, and the end of the line may be
restored as umu IKAN
u [ m Z u ZIKAN]; this may be rendered "one
day and one night," or possibly, as Zimmern in his translation
suggests, "day and night."
Line 9 is the last line of the text. T h e lower part of the
tablet is taken up with the common colophon found upon tablets
from ABnr-bani-pal's palace.

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

I22

11.

$ reference to t4e Creafion of tqe C a t t f e anb

t4e east^ of t4e jfiefb.'
I.

. .

e-nu-ma i h n i " i-na pu-uh-ri-Su-nu ib-nu-zc [

4. bu-ul g r i [zc-ma-a]m@riu nawz-ma;-Se-e [

5 . u[l]-tn5 [

. . ..

. . . .
.

] a-na fik-nu-at nu-pis"-ti [

7. [

. . . $u-zc]~-rinaam-ma;-ti

8. [

. . . .

l2

.

gi-mir nab-ni-ti [

] Su i-na pu-u$-ri Kim-ti-ia S[e-

.

]

.

]

.. ..

]

.

1

. .

.

.

' For the text, see Cuneiform Texts, part xiii, pl. jq, D.T. qr ;
for a previous publication, cf. Delitzsch, Assyrische Lesestzi'ike, 3rd
ed., p. 34 f.; and for previous translations, see George Smith, The
Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. 76f., Zimmern in Gunlrel's Schbpfung
und Chaos, and Jensen in Schrader's ICeiIz'ns. Bibl., vi, p. qz f.
This fragment, which George Smith suggested might be part of
the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series, does not belong to that
series; it contains the introduction or opening lines of a text,
and describes the creation of two small creatures by Nin-igi-azag,

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

123

11. @ reference fo flje Creafion of f4e Ccfffe anb

flje @east6 of flje siefb,l
When the gods in their assembly had made [the
world] ,"
2 . And had created the heavens, and had formed [the
earth] ,"
3. And had brought living creatures into being

I.

I . . . . 11
4. And [had fashionedI4 the cattle of the field, and
the beasts of the field, and the creatures [of
the city],5. After5 [they had . . . . ] unto the living
creatures [ . . . . 1,
6. [And between the beasts16 of the field and the
creatures of the city had divided [ . . . . 1,
7. [And had . . . . ] all creatures, the whole
of c r e a t i o ~[~ . . . . 1,
8. [And had . . . . 1, which in the whole of
myfamily[ . . . . 1,
" T h e lord of clear vision." T h e reference to the creation of
cattle and beasts of the field is merely incidental ; it occurs in
the long opening sentence and indicates the period at which the
two small creatures were made; see further the Introduction.
Possibly restore kullatu at the end of the line.
Possibly restoreir{iti; Jensen suggests dun-ni-nu (cf. p. 108,
1. 1 1 5 ) .
Probably restore aii ibna at the end of the line.
T h e reading u[l]-tu is certain from the traces on the tablet.
Probably restore the beginning of the line as nna biil.

Iz4

O T l I E R ACCOUNTS O F ClIEATION.

14 [

. . . . . .

I3-$i

[The rest of the

111. @
I.

i-n[anztext is

. . . . . .

]

wanting.]

reference to t4e Creafion of tlje m o o n
anb f4e

uo5 AN - NA
DINGIII

( D I N G I ~ I ) EN- L I L - LA (DINGIR)

E N-

ICI

- [E - NEI6

Possibly restore the verb as jib-nil-i-ma: Jensen suggests the
restoration [i-te-Zi]-2-ma and adds ib-nu-a at the end of the line.
a Restore inn at the beginning of the line; at the end of the
line Jensen suggests the reading nab-nzl-su-un.
T h e traces of the character before ~iare those of pa or d ; we
cannot, therefore, read [ . . . pi]-si i-n[am 6i3, ('[ .
]
he calleth the white one by name [ . . . .
It is probable,
however, that the second section of the text also dealt with the two
small creatures whose creation is described in the first paragraph.
* T h e text is taken from the obverse of the tablet 82-7-14,
4,005, which is published in vol. ii, pl. xlix. T h e tablet is one of the
so-called "practice-tablets," or students' exercises, and contains
on the obverse an extract from a Sumerian composition (11. 1 - 7 ) .
an extract from a Babylonian composition (11. 8-14) very similar
to the Su~nerianextract which precedes it, and on the lower part

I."

OTIIER ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

I25

9. [Then did] Nin-igi-azag [fashion]'
10.
I I.
12.

two small
creatures [ . . . . 1,
[Among] all the beasts he made [their form]'
glorious
[ . . . . ] the goddess Gula . . [ . . ]
[ . . . . ] . , one white [and one black

. . . .
13. [ . . . . ] . . one white and one black
[ . . . . _ I
I4.[

.

. . . . 1"

. .

.

[ . . . .

1

[The rest ol the t e x t is wanting.]

111.
I.

@ reference fo f4e Creation of t4e Woon
anb f4e fjun.'
When ' the gods W n a , Enlil, and Enki

of the tablet a number of grammatical notes arranged in three
columns and referring to the extracts given above. T h e first word
of 1. 8 is hroken, but the traces suggest the word ;[a]-n[i]-Le],
which may he rendered "version!'
Lines 8-14 are not, however,
a literal translation of 11. 1-7, though they appear to have been
taken from a somewhat similar Babylonian text. It is clear that
the extracts formed the opening lines of the compositions to
which they belonged, and that the scribe has written them out for
comparison, adding notes on some of the expressions which occur.
That both the Sumerian and Babylonian extracts are to be
taken as single sentences, and not broken up into separate phrases,
is proved by the note in 1. 1 5 . Here the scrihe equates LID with
e-nu-ma, and to e-nu-ma adds the grammatical note is'-tu Su-fa-mu-zr
mal-ma-ld, " corresponding to ir~tama.''
The end of the line should possibly be restored as D I N c m [GAL-GAL- LA^, '. the great gods."

I 26

3.
4.

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

E N- ZU - N A

MA -TU

(DINGIR)

U-SIR

SIR-SIR-DA4

5.u-ITI~
6. M A - T U 6
7. SAG AN

AN-NA

13. a-nze-lut-turn "'.$amas's
I 4.

hi-rib

s'nnzZ(e)

IM-PA-UD-DU

IGI - BAR

NA

u

U -TU

-

- E[$]

UD-DA

M U - U N - G I - N E - ~ 3

AN-ICI-A

-

MU - U N - G I - NE

ITU

ina

-

RA

SA-A -NE

TA - UD - DU

li66i 626 n ~ i - s i l i-nzu-ru

ir?iiim(tiwz)

hi-nis'

uf-fa-?m-u'0

' Cf. Briinnow, No. 5,525.
' Cf. Br., NO. 10,374.
The group MA-TU occurs in the Cylinder Inscription of Tiglathpileser I, co!. i, 1. 6, in the expression :a-fiu-u MA-Tu, applied to
Sin ; and, from the occurrence of the parallel expression {a-ku-u
nam-r;-n'on the obelisk of Shalmaneser 11, 1. 6, MA-TU is rendered
namn'm, "brightness."
In 1. 17 of the text the scribe furnishes
the new equation MA-TU="'~EB-KI-RU,
and at the end of the
line he adds the explanation R U = e-di-Iu. MA-TU, therefore,
signifies the brightness of the New Moon, and in the present
passage may be translated "renewal!'
The group SIR-SIK = dana (Br., No. + , 3 o 4 j r ~ ~ a ? Z . ( 4,302)~
N.

CREATION OF THE MOON AND S U N .

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

127

Through their sure counsel' and by their great
commands '
Ordained the renewal of the Moon-god,
T h e reappearance of the moon,4 and the creation
of the month,
And ordained the oracle of heaven and earth,
T h e New Moon did Ana cause to appear,
In the midst of heaven he beheld it come forth.

8. [Version].' When Anu, Be1 and Ea,
9. The great gods, through their sure counsel
10. Fixed the bounds of heaven and earth,
I I . (And) to the hands of the great gods entrusted
12. T h e creation of the day and the renewal of the
month which they might behold,
13. (And) mankind beheld the Sun-god8 in the gate
of his going forth,
14. In the midst of heaven and earth they duly
created (him).l0

and napabu (No. 4,327); in 1. 18 the scribe equates u-SIR with
ar-$a, but, as ITU occurs in the second half of 1. 4, it is preferable
to take U-SIR as referring to the moon itself (cf. Br., No. 7,860).
Cf. Br., NO. 9,426.
See above, note 3.
' See above, p. 125, note 4.
See above, p. 1 2 5 , note 5 .
It is interesting to note that in the Semitic version the creation
of the sun is substituted for that of the moon, although in the
preceding line the renewal of the month is referred to.
T h e reverse of the tablet, which is badly preserved (see vol. ii,
pl. L), is inscribed with some grammatical and astrological notes.

128

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

I.

<$tu

2.

e - nu - ma

3. ina
4. inu

at - ti2

n

n8ru

bannt(at)

i/z - vu - k i

- hi - ki4

[if - hu

ka
iLaui"

-

~IU]

- Z[a

-

nzu]

7,abziti*'
dmiz

- ka5

libbi-hi '"'E-a s'ar a$-si-i ib-na~[a < ~ - 6 n t - s u ] ~

5. a - bu - u6

- bar ka - a - Si is'- I , Z L ~ - [ku]'
6. i - <a - N I I I Z uz - zn na - ? I Z Z ~ -Y YU - t i $81 - LIJ& - t [ i ]
7. " ' E - a u "'MardwR8 G -ru - ku - nik - kiuz - ?iia
8. d [ i ]- ni te - n i - Se - e - t i ta - din - 7 z i at - t i 9
9. nEru rabiti(ti) n i i ~ ~ zsir
~ - ti ~ziEru pi'- 9 i - e - ti10
la

7F/U

-

This mystical river of creation was evidently suggested by the
Euphrates, on the waters of which the fertility of Babylonia so
largely depended; for a comparison of similar conceptions of
a river of creation both in Egyptian and in Hebrew mythology,
see the Introduction. T h e text forms the opening words of an
incantation and is taken from the reverse of S. 1 , 7 0 4 , with
restorations and variant readings from the obverse of 82-9-18,
5 . 3 1 1 (cf. Appendix 11). A translation of the former tablet has
been given by Sayce, Hi6bert Lectures, p. 403.
82-9-18, 5,311, at-ta.
82-9-18, 5 , 3 1 I , ha-na~a-t[um].
82-9-18, 5 , 3 1 1 , ina a-hi-ka.
82-9-18, 5 . 3 1 1 , durn-ki; the division of 11. 2-4 in the text is
taken from 82-9-18, 5,31 I .
' 82-9-18, 5,311, &a kir-hi-ha " " E a (AN-IIAT) {ar a$si d-nu-a
Ju-bat-su ; it is possible that the line in S. 1 , 7 0 4 read dun2-ka ina
libhi-ki2"E-a {ur a$-si-i d-nu-[a].

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

I.
2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

I 29

0,thou River, who didst create all things,
When the great gods dug thee out,
They set pros6erity upon thy banks,'
Within thee Ea, the King of the Deep, created
his d ~ e l l i n g , ~
T h e deluge they sent not before thou wert ! '
Fire, and wrath, and splendour, and terror
Have E a and Marduk presented unto thee !
Thou judgest the cause of mankind!
0 River, thou art mighty! 0 River, thou art
supreme ! 0 River, thou art righteous ! lo

'

Upon 82-9-r8, 5.31 1, 11. 5-7 read as follows: ( 5 ) i&~-uR-ki~
im-ma uz-zu na-mur-turn pu-luh-turn ( 6 ) a-6u-6u la mah-ri ha-a-{u
im-di-Ka (7) [ p l i - k i " ' E a ( A N . BAT) u "'Mcrduk (AN. ASAR. LU.SAR)
is'-m-ku im-ma. It may he noted that the duplicate in 1. 5 reads
im-ma, "daylight," for i-&-/urn, "fire," and for I. 7 gives the
interesting variant reading " A t thy word did Ea and Mardult
bestow the daylight."
A N . ASAR

.LU . SAR.

.

82-9-r,8, 5 , 3 1 1 reads [ .
]-nu fe-xi-{tee-turn fa-dm-nu nf-fa.
'"882-9-18, 5 , 3 1 1 omits 1. 9, and from this point onwards it seems
probable that the tablets ceased to be duplicates. Thc invocation

to the river ceases with 1. g , the lines which lollow on each tablet
containing the personal petitions of the suppliant (cf. Appendix 11).

O T H E R ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

I30

v. &notRer Qerciion of f4e Creation of fqe Worfb
0~ @tarbu&.'
OBV.

I . E N 2 E AZAG-GA E D l N G I R - E - N E I<I MIN N U MU-UN-RU

bit*

eZ-lim bit iZ#niP1 ina as'-ri el-linz uZ e-pu-us"

2. G I

ka

3.

NU

E

UZ

a - si

- nu - u

MUR

GI!~ - U

- I<U
iza -a( - ban - t i

SUB

NU

li-bit-ti u l 7za - da - at
4. l3
biiu

5.

NU

URU NU

alu

RU

e

7 d

-

pu - us"

DIM

RU

ul e - p u - u s '

7. UNUG(KI) N U
RU
U - ruk ul e - pi^ - us"
8. ABZU

up - su - u

NU

ul

ul

RU

e -pa

- [u;]

DIM

- ni

ba

NU

DIM

u l ba - na - at

URU

NU

aZn

Z

- DAM
NU
na7u - ?nnsV-s'u - u

NU

Ni-ip-pu-ru

NU

A

ul e - p u - us"

6. EN - LIL(ICI)

CIS
i - ~i

DIM

ba

ni

MU-UN-[GAR]

ul

E-ICUR-RA
NU
E-kur

-

ul

E-AN-NAN U
E - MIN uL

Sa

-

kin

DIM

ba-7zi
DIM
(id

- izi

NUN(I<I) N U
DIM
R"dE~idU ul ba - n i

For the text, see Cuneifom Texts, part xiii, pls. jsff. (82-5zz, 1,048); and for previous translations, see Pinches, J.R.A.S.,
vol. xxiii (new series), pp. 393 ff. ; Zimmern in Gunkel's SchbPfung
und Chaos, p. 419 f. ; and Jensen in Schrader's 1E'eLIins. Bi6Z., vi,
pp. 38 ff. T h e variant legend of the creation is contained on the
portion of the ohvcrse of the tablet which has been preserved,
but it docs not form the principal subject of the composition; it

OTHER ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

I3I

Onv.
I.

T h e holy house, the house of the gods, in the
holy place had not yet been made ;

2.

No reed had sprung up, no tree had been created.

3. No brick had been laid, no building had been
set up ;

4. No house had been erected, no city had been
built ;

5. No city had been made, no creature had been
created.
6. Nippur had not been made, E-kur had not been
built ;
7. Erech had not been created, E-ana had not been
built ;
8. The Deep had not been created, Eridu had not
been built ;
is merely an elaborate introduction to an incantation which was
intended to be recited in honour of E-zida, the great temple of
Naba at Borsippa. T h e reverse of the tablet contains the
concluding lines of the incantation. For a further discussion of
the legend on the obverse, see the Introduction.
a EN, i.e. &jtu, "incantation," the \%,ordplaced at the beginning
of most religious and magical compositions intended for recitation.

132

O T I I E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

9. E

AZAG

DINGIR-XI-E-NE

hitu el - Lum

- ICUR - RA - G E
ma - ta - a - tu

1 0 . [NIGIN]

12.

A

ICUIC

nap - &a?'
I I.

III-DUIC-BI

NU

DIM

hit i l r i n i ' V u - bat - s i ~ uL ip - s'e

- AU - B.4

-A

tavt - tuvz

A - A B - BA - G E
[u]
SAG
i - nu fa
k i - rib
tanz - tint

RAD

- UA

- 1fla

- NA -

m - ;u -

- it

UIIP

NAM

ma

[U - B I - A
NUN(III)] Bh..RU E-SAG-IL-LAHA-DIM
ina u m i - s'u a'"Eridu e - p u - us" E - M I N ha - n i

-

13.

[E-SAG-ILIASAG
DUL-AZAG-GA

ABZU

E-E-NE

(DINGIR)

LUGAL-

MU-NI-IN-RI-A

E-MIN
?a ina hi-rib a$-si-i ~ " ~ u ~ a I - d z ~ L - a z air-g'-nz1~-u
g-ga

- RU E - SAG - I L - LA SU - U L
e - pu - [us']
E - SUE - ila
Sz~k- ZuZ

14. [KA-~INGI~I-RA](I<I)

L

BA

15. [(DINGIR) A ] - N U N - N A - G E - E - N E

'"'A - 7zun - ~za- k i

ila7".ifl
16. [URU]

KI-DUR

AZAG-GA

MAH-A

URU-BI

13A-AN-RU

wit -&a- ris" e - pu

- 26s"

~AG-DUG-GA GE-E-NE-MU-

MI-NI-IN-SA-A

a/% el-Lunt fu-bat

tu-ub lib-hi-s"u-nu ;i-riS iln-bu-n

17. [(DINGIR)] GI-21-MA .GI-DIR

I-NE-NA

A

NAM-MI-NI-

IN-ICESUA
"'MarduK
18.

SAFJAR

- RA

a - ma - am
N I - SAR

ina pa - an
A - III

A

- DIR

me - e

NA~~MI-IN-DUB

e - p i - r i i b - ? z i - ? ~ z ai t - t i a - n z i
19. DINGIIC-RI-E-NE

III-DUR

SAG-IIUG-GA

ir-ku-us

is"-pu-uk
NE-IN-DUR-I~U-

N ti-ES-A-MA

ilcini iiza

&-bat

tu - u6

Lib - -6i

aria

S21

-

Su - bi

THE CREATION OF DRY LAND.

I33

9. Of the holy house, the house of the gods, the
10.

habitation had not been made.
All lands were sea.

I I.

A t that time there was a movement in thc sea ;

12.

Then was Eridu made, and E-sagil was built,

13. E-sagil, where in the midst of the Deep the god
Lugal-dul-azaga' dwelleth ;
14. T h e city of Babylan was built, and E-sagil was
finished.
15. T h e gods, the Anu,nnalii, h e 2 created at one time ;
16. T h e holy city, the dwelling of their hearts' desire,

they proclaimed supreme.
17. Mardulr laid a reed upon the face of the waters,

18. He formed. dust and poured it out beside the reed.
19. That he might cause the gods to dwell in the

habitation of their hearts' desire,

' Or, Lugal-du-azaga.

' I.e., Rlarduk.

'34

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

A - R U - R U ICUL do. DINGIR - TA N E - I N - SAR
zi - iv a - me - Lu ti it - ti - S% ib - la - nu

2 I . (DINGIR)

-

"" MIN

- RU
bu-ul ?Fri Ss'i Rzn iza-pi!-ti ina si - e - r i ib - ta - n i
-AN~U

22. BIR

2 3 . (ID) IDIGNA
MIN

21

GAR

(ID)

MIN

- ZI

EDIN - N A

- IG

R U R A N U N UME-DIM ICI GAR-RA-DIM
i 6 - n i - m a iiza as"-ri i s ' - k u - z l n

24. MU - N E - N E - A
Sum
Si - na

- DUG

NAM

-

MI

- NI

tic - 62s"

GI-$3-RUSUG GIs-GI

2 5 . GI-BE

BA

- I N - SA

GIs-TER-GID-GE

US-s"u di-it-ta a#-pa-ri ha-nu-a u h i - Su
26.

u -

RIG

- h i - it
27. [{CUR - I ~ U ] I <- RA
7na - ta - a - tu?n

-

EUIN

s2 -

ur

NA

.

29. [

. .

BA-DIM

ib - ta - u i

- RU
- ta - izi

BA

riiiz

i6

GIS -

SUG
up - p a - ri

GI - N A - N A M

a - p u - urn - ma

...

28. [

-A

- bi

iin

..

] CUD-LID-KA GE SURIM .
LU AMAS-A
lit-tu pu-zrr-Sa me-ru la-a&-rupu-had-sa i~n-mirsu-pu-ri

Ri

-

. . ] - TER
ra tz~

G ~ S-

TER

hi -

u

-

-

BI

s"a -

-

NAM

tu -

ma

NA

. . . ] ZAG A-AB-BA-GE [ . .
. ]
be-Zum '":Mardztk ina pa-at tam-ti% inin-/a-a u-nzal-li

3 1 . r . .

32.

[
[

. . . . . ]
. . . . -n]a

GI5 - G I

PA

-

RIM

a - p a i z n - ? n o - /a

NE

- [IN

-GAR]

is"- AIL

- uir

13s

THE CREATION OF MANKIND.

20.

H e formed mankind.

21.

T h e goddess Aruru together with him' created
the seed of mankind.
T h e beasts of the field and living creatures in the
field he formed.

22.

H e created the Tigris and the Euphrates, and he
set them in their place ;
24. Their names he declared in goodly fashion.

23.

25.

T h e grass, the rush of the marsh, the reed, and

26.

the forest he created,
T h e green herb of the field he created,

27.

T h e lands, the marshes, and the swaillps ;

T h e wild cow and her young, the wild calf; the
ewe and her young, the lamb of the fold ;
29. Plantations and forests ;

28.

30. T h e he-goat and the mountain-goat .

..

. him.

31..T h e IordMarduk laid in a dam by the side of the
sea,
32. [He . . . . ] a swamp, he made a marsh,
' The Sumerian version reads

"together with the god."

1 3 ~

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

-

- TUIC
us" - ta - Si

MU

: . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
BA - A N - ~ J B ]
[MUR
[ Z i - bit - tu
id - d i

35.[
[

36.

37

LE
[bitu

BA

e

-

- us"

A

BA

US - r i

ina

- U - RU
- all - ban - tu

BA

I<I

-

DIM

-

AN

-

i6

UN

-

ni

- RU

ib - ta

MU

aZu

-

- ta

ib

GIs

na

38. [URU MU - U N -DIM] A - DAM
[ o h e - pu
US noin - mas"

-

-

I<I

URU

RU]

- pu

]
]

UN

- ni
DIM

- ta - u ] i

MU-UN-GAR-[RA]

- u zS- t ] a - han
39 [EN- LIL(I<I) BA - IIU] E - I<UR - R A - G E BA - D I M
[ H i - 2 ) - p u - r u e - p u - u s " E - kuv ib - ta - nil
40. [UNUG(KI) BA - R U E - A N - N]A
BA - D[IM]
[U - ruk e - pu - us" E - MIN
zb - ta - u i ]
Su

[The rest of the Obverse and the beginning of the Reverse of the tablet are
wanting.]

3. [ .
. GAL]-AN-zu III-GAL DINGII<-1~1-[E-NI-GE]
4. swk-kaZ-la-ka ji-i-YU '"Pap-sukaZ ir-Su ma-Zik ihni*'

5.

(DINGIR)

'" MIN

NIN-A-FA-KUD-DUDU
nzar - ti

(DINGIR)

EN-ICI-GA-GE
'

.

a

T H E CREATION O F CITIES.

33. [

. . .

.

I37

. . ] he brought into existence.

34. [Reeds he formled, trees he created ;

3 j. [ .

.

. . .

.

.

] he made in their place,

36. [Bricks he laid], buildings he set up ;

37. [Houses he made], cities he built ;

38. [Cities he made], creatures he created.
39. [Nippur he made], E-lrur he built ;

40. [Erech he made, E-anla he built.

[The rest of the Obverse and the beginning of the Reverse of the tablet are
wanting.]

REV.
I.

[

.

. . .

.

] the decree [ .

. . .

.

I

3 f. Thy exalted minister is Papsulral, the wise
counsellor of the gods.
5. May Nin-aha-kudu, the daughter of Ea,

138

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

. . . .

6.NlG-NA-[

ina

7.

nik - nu

GI-BIL-LA

ina

VU-MU-RA-AB-EL-LA

- hi

E L - [LA]
MIN

8. DUIC-A-GUB-BA

]

- Ln
uZ - i - ha
H U - MU - RA - A B - L A B - LA15 - GA
i - bi
ub - hi - zb - ha
eL

[EL-LA

ABZU]

ICI

NER-DU-NA-ZU

U-MU-UN-NA-AZAG

g. ina MIN-e el-Za Sa a$-si-i a-Say tal-Zak-ti-ha uZ-Zu

- DUG - GA
(DINGIR) ASAR- LU - SAR
AN - ICI - SAR - RA - GE

10. MU

ina

MIN-e

I I. WE-GAL

'"'Marduk fay Kit-fat SamZ(e) u i~$ciflz(tim)
KUR-RA-GE

nu - &us"
12. M E - z u

par
13. E

LUGAL

ma - a - ti

SAG-zu
ana

U-UL-DU-A-SU

- su - ka ana n - ma

- ZI

- DA

KI

- UUR

-

K I DUR
ME

?A-BA-RA-AN-TU-TU

lib - 6i - ha

Zi -

YU

- ub

SU-FA-RA-AN-DU-DU
[;a] - a - ti l i i - tak - Z i - Zu

MAE1

AN - NA

(DINGIR)

NINNI

- EN

- MIN Sub - tum ?ir - turn nu - ~a7u lib - bi "'A - n u
u "'1s'tar at - ta
AN - GIM H E - E N - AZAG - GA [ICI - G I M H E ] - E N - E L - L A
SAG - A N - GIM H E '

14. E

IS.

' T h e scribe has not written out the rest of the verb; it is
probable that he intended it to be read as be-[e~-ZaE-Zab-~a],
as
indicated in the translation. I n Assyrian the line would read kima
Sama ZiZiZ kima iysiii Zi6ib kima ki~ibJam? iimmir.

ADDRESS TO E-ZIDA.

I39

6. Purify thee with the pure censer,

7. And may she cleanse thee with cleansing fire !
8 f. With a cup of pure water from the Deep shalt
thou purify thy way !
10.

By the incantation of Marduli, the king of the
hosts of heaven and earth,

I I.

May the abundance of the land enter into thee,

12.

And may thy decree be accomplished for ever!

I;

f. 0 E-zida, thou glorious dwelling, thou art dear
unto the hearts of Anu and Ishtar !

15. May (Ezida) shine lilie the heavens, may it be
bright like the earth, may it [be glorious]' like
the heart of heaven,
16. [And may . . . . ] be firmly established !
I n Assyrian Zizziz.

gives the title of the prayer as
and 1. 18 gives the
catch-line to the next tablet, which [nay perhaps be restored as
Y@iu 'zMz6" [Mar-gid-da] pmdu fa-ma-mi,
0 [Margida], thou
waggon of the heavens ! "
INIM-INIM-MA

[

. .

.

Line

.

17

1 GA-GA-NE-GE;

140

VI.

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

C4e " Cut~deangeqenb of fqe Credtion."
COLUXNI.
[The upper half of the column is wanting.]

[a- . . . . . ]
2. bzL ME-CAN [
3. di - en - SZL puru.rszZ
[ . . . . . .
4. utukku pir'u - Su ekimmu pir'u - S[u .
I.

.

. . 1
. . . . ]
. . . . 1

,

8. ina nari3 uZ Salir uZ ezzb-au-7na4 paf-ri u pu-U-ti5

' T h e text is taken from the tablet K. 5 , 4 1 8 ~and its duplicate
K. 5,460 (see Cunez@om Texts, part xiii, pls. 39-+I). T h e legend
was for some years known as " t h e Cuthaean legend of the
Creation." It was thought that the text was put in the mouth of
the god Nergal, who was supposed t u be waging war against the
brood of Tiamat; and it was assumed that Nergal took the place
of Marduk in accordance with local tradition at Cuthah. I t is
clear, however, that the speaker is not the god Nergal, but an old
Babylonian king, who recounts how the gods delivered him and
his land from hordes of monsters. I n the description of the
monsters in col. i, Tiamat i s said to have suckled them, but this
reference does not justify their identification with the monster
brood of the Creation Series ; it is more probable that Tiamat is
~ a l l e dtheir foster-mother in order to indicate their terrible nature.
I n The Chnldean Account of Genrsis, pp. r o z ff., George Smith gave

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

[The upper half of the column is wanting
I.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

141

I

[ . . . . 1% 2. H e w a s l o r d o f . . [ . . . . 1 ;
His judgment was the decision [of . . . . 1.
T h e fiend was his offspring, the spectre was his
offspring [ . . . . ] ;
H e was lord of the height and of the depths, he
was lord of the Anunnaki [ . . . . 1.
A people who drinlc turbid water, and drink not
pure water,
Whose sense is perverted, had talien (men) captive,
had triumphed over them, and had committed
slaughter.
O n a tablet nought was written, nought was left
(to rite).^ In mine own person

a translation of the legend, and, though he describes it as
a "Legend of Creation," he correctly recognized the general
character of its contents. For later translations see Sayce, Records
of the Past, vol. xi, pp. 109 ff., and vol. i (new series), pp. 149ff. ;
Zimmern, Zeils. fi'r Assyr., xii, pp. 319 K ; and Jensen, Keilins.
Bibl., vi, pp. zgoff. For earlier publications of the text of
K. 5,bqo, see S. A. Smith, Misceilancous Texts, pl. 6 f., and of the
text of K. 5,418, see Winckler, Sammlung uon Z<ez%chrififezten,ii,
pl. 70 f.
a T h e first six lines which are preserved are taken from I<. 5 , 6 4 0

-

K . , 64 , a""' nari.
Le., the land was in confusion, so that n o business was
transacted and no records were kept.
Cf. Zimmern, Z.A., xii, p. 3 2 3 .
S

142

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

9. ina

mati'

-

u sb - si - ma

ul

uZ ab - fa - rab - t n

T i - a - ma - tu
u - Je - nik - Ju - nu - ti
14. Sa - sur - Su - nu
'Be - Z - i - Z
u - ban - n i
13.

15.

ina hi-ri6

ia&(i)
ir

-

16. VIZ s'arrani" ( n i )
17. CCCLX. M7A-kN
18. A n

- 6a - 7 z i - n i

20
2 I.

-

Su

-

u

mi

-

at &u - u l n - pu
urn - nza

abu - s'u - nu

[Sar]
I 9.

fa

zl.-ti-6u-ma5 i - t e - i t - l u - m a

- na
Sa7,ru

- ~a - tu

- nu - ti

- n ha - nu - tu

- tu -

s'u

-

nu

-

u$nnzu - i n nu
'Me

- Zi

Zi

a&-&-nu rabzi(u) a-Zihihpa-ni-iu-nu"Me-;nu-an-ga6 Suin-?'u

- [ u- n u ]
Salfu({n) a& - [Su - nu
a

)

u

' The

" M e - du - du
"' . .

.

Sum - Su

] - ZuZ S I L- ~i u~

reading is not certain ; MU is possible, i.e. taFnNa, " f o r
a year." T h e phrase is omitted by I<. 5,640, in which the line
begins with ul.
I<. 5,640, i+r.

I<. 5,640, fa.
Literally, " city."

9. From my land' I went not forth, and I did not

give them battle.
10. A people who had the bodies of birds of the
hollow, men who had the faces of ravens,
I I . Had the great gods created,
12. And in the ground the gods created a clwellingplace4 for them.
13. Tiamat gave them suck,
14. T h e Lady of gods brought them into the world.
1 5 . I n the midst of the mountain (of the world) they
became strong, they waxed great, they multiplied exceedingly.
16. Seven Icings, brethren, fair and comely,
17. Three hundred and sixty thousand7 in number
were their forces.
18. Anbanini, their father, was king ; their mother,
Melili, was queen.
19. Their eldest brother, their leader, was named
Memangab ;
20. [Theirla second brother was named Medudu ;
21. [Their] third brother was named [ . . . . ]lul ;
qK.
5,640, hie-[liul-u-ma; the scribe has omitted lil* by mistake.
K. 5,640 omits ni.
' It is probable that 360,000, and not 6,000, should be read, in
view of the large numbers which occur in col. ii, 11. 1 9 ff.
T h e restoration of the pronominal suffix in this and the
following lines is conjectural.

I44

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

[The upper half of the column3 is wanting.]

. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I
2. [ZL-tuk(?)]-ki
[rla-[blz-g~ lim-nu-te [ . . . . . ]
3 . r i - du - u
t e - en - Su
u - tr[r - . . . ]
I . [

. . . 1
. . . . 1-si arrat

4.iiza

5. [

[

,

I . - P[u - . .
Zivzutti ~nlitiiti*'~it-tn-[ . .

- e

.
.

]

]

6. n[l] - st
mli~?P """" b a ~ j * ~ u - mn - ' - [ir]
7 . [ V11 n - na pa - ail] VZZ "''m'"" puhadu a2 - pu - t [ u ]6
S. [U - kilt
gu&&?]*"
eLZQ'ziN
9. a - Sal - m[a]
ilmz fl
m(izZti"'
ro. '"'11-tar ""[ .
] '"Za-ma-ma '"'A-7zu-ni-fu7ir

. . .

' Possibly SAG.
This is the last line of the column.
T h e missing portion of the column probably contimled the
description of the hordes of monsters, who were oppressing the
land. T h e king then enquires of the gods whether he should give
the enemy battle (cf. 11. 6 ff.).
This rendering is conjectural.

TIlE

" CUTIIAEAN

I45

LEGEND."

[Their] fourth brother was named [ . . . . dlada;
23. [Their] fifth [brother] was named [ . . . . Idah ;
24. [Their] sixth [brother] was named [ . . . . r]u ;
2 5 . [Their seventh brother] was named [ . . . .
22.

[The upper half oi the columny is wanting.]

I . [
2.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

Evil [fiends] and demons

.

. . . .. . I
that lie in wait [ . . . ]
.

3. Pursuing after (a man), turned [him] from his
purpose.
4. In [

5. [ .

. .
. .

. . ]did I [ .
. ] an evil curse

.

. . 1

was [cast upon

(?)I

the lands.4
6 . [I] cried unto the magicians, and I directed them,
7. I set out the lambs for sacrifice [in rows of] seven.
8. [I placed there also] the holy [ . . . . 1%'
9. And I enquired of the great gods,
10. Of IStar, and [ . . . . 1, and Zamama, and
Anunitum,
I I . And [ . . . . 1, and Sama;, the warrior.
12. And the gods [commanded me] that I should go,
but [ . . . . ] they gave not (unto me).
The beginnings of 11. 6-8 are restored from col. iii, 11. 18-20.
T h e sign is TU, not ~6 (= ul).
' T h e ideogram is explained as gu-uk-h[u] in I<. 4,174 (see
Thompson, Cun. Texts, part xi, pl. 47, and Jensen, K.B., vi,
p. 294). T h e traces of the third sign upon the tablet are those
of hu, not lu.
Restored from col. iii, 1. 23.
10

146

O T H E R ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

1 3 . h ~- a

-

a772

a+

- ma
- BAR - [

u7u
I4 ai

-

u

15.ai-u

LlR

UR-BAR-[

- bi
l14

I 8.

lu

iattu

- nd - di3
ma&

-

-

. . .
.

.

16. Z ~ I Z - Z ~ R
h i - i atZ-RiL [

17. u

a

n

-

nn
a

Zih

-

7na

-

-

h i - ia

k 7 ~- nza

. . . .
. ] ib - ri
. . . . . ] fa-il-fz4
. . . 1-pzi" L i b - h i - i n

sh p a m i l i i ia ~i - tz
ina

- ti Zu - ny - hat
h a - i'a - d i 4

T h e exclamatory phrase lu-u a-nu-ku-nza may perhaps be best
rendered in this way.
' T h e sign is AT, not T U R ; in other signs the scribe tends to
carry through his horizontal wedges.
T h e word lu-ud-di evidently refers to a weapon of some kind.
I t was pointed out by Zimmern (Z.A., p. 317f.) that another
version of this portion of the legend is preserved on a fragment of
an Old-Babylonian tablet, the text of which is published in NeoAssyrian characters by Scheil, Recueil de frauaux, xx, p. 65 f.
According to Scheil, the fragment in question forms the third or
fourth column of a tablet, and in 1. 8 he read the name of the king
Tukulti-hel-nisi ; hut its parallelism with 1. 2 2 f. of col. ii of the
"Cuthaean Legend," as Zimmern pointed out, disproved the
reading, and in place of Scheil's IZ-KU-fi
[i.e. fukuNi(fi)1, a-ka-p'
[or a d ] , and a-nu-ar in 1. 8 f. we may probably read zisi-hu, a-ka-la,
and a-na-hi (cf. also Jensen's transliteration and translation of the
text in K.B., vi, pp. 298 ff.). T h e column of text preserved by the
fragment reads as follows : ( I ) lin-ta-&-a? fa-ap-da-a u-uZ i-zi[
. . . ] ( 2 ) i-nu ?aFa-ni-iI1 .F[u]-f[i]Zi-nzu um-ma-ni
u-se-scam-ma ( 3 ) lin-fa-ha-a? fa-up-da-a u-ma-nl-Zi {i-ra (4) i-nn
{a-al-fi Yu-!i li-mi um-ma-na u-1%-~i-am-ma( 5 ) e-li s'a fan-na u-wa
(i.e. PI)-of-it-ir Su-a-ti (6) i?-fu VZ 'Iu-h' Zi-mi um-ma-ni i-m-ru
( 7 ) im-fa-&as fa-up-da-a ra-62-a ( 8 ) a-nu-kz~ is-si-Eu en-ni-ii
( 9 ) a-ka-la a-na-/ii a-$-us' am-ti-ma (10) urn-ma a.na-ku SU(?)-AN
a-na pali-ia rnllnam ub-lam ( I I ) a-nn-ku !a?-rum la nzu-fafa-Zim
[ma].
f2-fu ( ( 1 2 ) [ u ] rZ'a la mu-fa-lirn ni--h:i.:u ( 1 3 ) Ib-a-Si pali(e) mi-nanz
u6-lam ( 1 4 )hi-i lu-u5-fa-as-[?]-ma ( 1 5 j p a - a g - ~ZLi um-ma-ni l ~ - & - ~ i

'

". .

TIlE

" CUTIIAEAN

I47

LEGEND."

13. Then spake I unto my heart,
Saying : " By my life !
14. W h o is . . [ . . . . ] my friend ?
I 5. W h o is
. . [ . . . . ] a sorcerer ?
16. But I will go, since I have put my trust in the
[ . . . . ] of my heart,
17. And my weapon of iron will I take!"
18. A s the first year drew nigh,4
(16) a-nu hu-ul-lu-u+ ~ i - r iAk-ha-di-i (17) emLn'nahra da-an-na
id-ki-am-ma (18) [
. . . . 1-e fa(?)-am-$a-n'-a fi-[?I-gi-a
(19) [ .
. . ] gu-uk-ha-ni-e ( 2 0 ) [ . . . . ]
Ak-ka-di-i sa-pa-nu [ . . . . . 1, " ( I ) H e fought, and conquered
(lit. " h e fought a defeat"), and left not [one remaining]. ( 2 ) T h e
second time, one hundred and twenty thousand warriors I sent
forth, and (3) he fought, and conquered, and filled the plain (with
their bodies). (4) T h e third time, sixty thousand warriors I sent
forth, and (5) I caused them to he mightier than before. (6) After
he had slain the three hundred and sixty thousand warriors, (7) and
had fought, and had achieved a mighty victory, (8) I was desperate,
powerless, (9) and afflicted, I was cast down and full of woe, and
I lamented, (lo) saying: 'As for me
. . what have I brought
upon my realm ? (11) I am a king who hath brought no prosperity
unto his country, (12) and a shepherd who hath brought no
prosperity unto his people. (13) As for me and my realm, what
have I brought upon (upon us) (14) by
. . and ( I S )
causing myself and my warriors to go forth? (r6) T o destroy the
plain of Akkad (17) he hath summoned a mighty foe, and (18)
[ . . . . ] my battle . . , . (19) [
. . . ] . . .
(zo) [ . . . .
] to overwhelm Abkad [ . . . I."' From
the summary in 1. 6, the last line of the preceding column may
probably he restored, as " T h e first time, one hundrcd and eighty
thousand warriors I sent forth." Jensen also connects the fragment
K. 8,582 (see Haupt, Nimrodepos, p. 78) with the " Cuthaean
legend," since it describes in the first person the putting to flight
and capture of twelve ~ a r r i o r s and
,
contains the formula [kli-a-am
ah-6i ana lib-bi-i[a] ; cf. K.B., vi, p. 300 f.

.

..

.

.

.

.

.
.

.

.

14s

O T H E R ACCOUNTS OF Cl<EATION.

19. ZZ J'uSi. M

u~~znza~zu
u - Se - :i

zSten(e7z)
zo. s"aniturn(turn)

21.

- nza

6aOu

Saftu

ina

izza Libbi - fu - nu
ul

itziva(7,a)

XC. M

hai'adi(di)

do.

skZu/fum(fum)Sattu ina hafidi(di) L X . M+ VIZ.C do.

en

z z . is - si - bu
a - u

-

-

-

ni

i'u

a - h - L a

ZIP

us*

-

fa

-

ni

-3

23. hi-a-am a@-& a-na /d-hi-ia urn-ma Lu-u. a-~za-ku-ma
24.0,
25.

a

-

~za

- Im - ku

pa

- Li -

Snrru

e
La

7

mi - na - a
-a -i - I

:z. k i Lu - US-fail - kan - ma pag
3. fa-Zunz-mat ni-Si

- 1.i

e

-

5 . [ b z - sa - a/i] - &U

nztiti - !u

u pu - t i L'u - Se - .!i

ni-piL- su - u

i - Lib - n

. . . . . . .

ma

~ z i i6
- - r i - tu

- la

6a

7. [

- Sn - nu
. . . . . . . Li - if] . Sn

.

8. [

. . . . . . . . . . . .

a]-6u-ba

I

,rip1

nu-Si mu-u-tu nail2faru a-ru-zrr-tu

4. na-muv-ra-tu bar - ba fu

6.[

-

]

Lit., "added to."

z<-

kin a

- s"7~ - u

tar - da

-

bu . 6u
pi>zi2

THE

"

C U T H A E A N LEGEND."

I49

19. One hundred and twenty thousand warriors I sent
out, but not one returned alive.
20. AS the second year drew nigh, ninety thousand
warriors I sent out, but not one returned alive.
2 1 . As the third year drew nigh, sixty thousand
seven hundred warriors I sent out, but not one
returned alive.
2 2 . Despairing, powerless, and afflicted, I was full of
woe, and I groaned aloud,
23. And Ispake unto my heart, saying : " By my life !
24. What have I brought upon ' my realm ?
25.

" I am a king who hath brought no prosperity
unto his country,
COLUMN111.

I.

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

And a shepherd who hath brought no prosperity
unto his people.
" But (this thing) will I do. In mine own person
will I go forth !
" T h e pride of men, and night, and death, and
disease, and trembling,
" And fear, and terror, and
. . . , and hunger,
"And [famine], and misery of every kind
" Pursue after their [ . . . . . . . . 1.
" [But . . . . let] there be a deluge,
" [
. . . . . the] deluge of old time ! "

Ii

T h e reading of 51 a s p z n i is not certain.

I

50

I

z. tall. .6a .l r i l t r

O T H E R ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

. . . . . .
[ . . . . . . . .
+ U Y - [ .. . . . .
r~hGti(ti)Sa[tti . . .

.7/za

[

13. u Sub-Su-u
t a 14 zag - muk hr
1 5 . iua f e - m e - k i Sa " " E - a [ .
Sa
ildlzz *'
16. ni& zag .vzuk elZzitip' [ . . .

. .
.

te .ri .e .te ellzZti*' [ . . . . . . . . . . I
bay?"
21 - [vza - ' - i ] r
18. a2 - si
rndri'"
19. V I I a - na pa - an VZI "'2n"""pu~adual - p[u - t ] ~
20. u - bin
guhhi*'"
el~'[liti]*'~
21. a - Sal - ma
ihni"
~a[6ziiz]*'~
2 z , asAI;.tnv
,
. . '"'Za-~ra-77ra "'A-nu-ni-t]um
17.

"2"'

.

[The lower half of the column is wanting,+except for traces of what is probably
the laat line of the coli~mn,preserved by I<. 5,640.]

' T h e fragments of the tablet K. 5,418a are not quite correctly
put together, the beginnings of 11. 9ff. being one line higher on
the tablet than the ends of the lines to which they correspond.
a I t would seem that one of the gods urged the king to make
offerings and supplication at the Feast of the New Year, before
undertaking his fourth expedition. From 11. 14ff. it is clear that
the king followed the god's advice ; and, from the conclusion of
col. iv, it may be inferred that he at last met with success against
his enemies.

g.

' Then the god [ . . . . . . . . . .

] spake,'

And said [ . . . . . . . . . . ] :
. . . . . . . . . . . 1
" T h e gods [
1 2 . " Thou didst speak unto me and [ . . . . . . ]
13. " And to make [ . . . . . . . . . . ]
thou .
[ . . . . . . . .
14. T h e New Year's Feast in the fourth y[ear . . . I,
15. With supplication unto Ea, [the . . . . '1 of
the great gods,
16. Pure offerings for the Feast of the New Year

10.
I I.

I."

[....I,
17. Pure omens [

. . . . . . 1.

18. I cried unto the magicians, and I [directed them],
rg. I set [out] the lambs for sacrifice in rows of seven.
zo. I placed there also the holy . . . ,5
2 1 . And I enquired of the great gods,
22. Of IStar, [and
. . . and Zamama, and
Anunitlum,
v
and SamaS, the warrlior.
2 3 . And [
24. The son [ . . . 1 25. [ . . . . . . ]

.

[The lower half of the column is wanting,' except for traces of what is probably
the last line of the column, preserved by K. 5,6@.]

Possibly the 2nd pers. plur., "ye commanded a n d " ; but as
the god appears to be addressing the king, the rendering in the
translation is preferable.
The end of the sign ICES is preserved.
a See above, p. 145, n. 7.
I t is clear that in the missing portion of the column the king
describes the defeat of his foes, since in col. iv he refers to the
record of his history as an encouragement to future princes who
may succeed him on the throne.

OTHER ACCOUNTS O F CREATION.

152

COLUMNIV.
I.

it-t[i

. . .

.

.

]

. . .

z.niS2"

Za [

. .

-

. .

. .

]

6. Sarru dun - [nu
. ] uZ- ln [
. . 1
7. iLBni*i [
. . . - n]e ti u - [ . . . .
]
8. ka - t [ i . . . . ] - k
ul [
-p]iZ-{a-nu-ti
g. at ta Sarru is's'nkku ru62i lu mamma
- nu - nza

.

-

. . .

-

12.

13.

i - na
KufaX'
ina
i - na pa - pa&
""NergaZ

e

E - Sid - lanz
- z i - 6ak - kn

-

a
mur
an - na - a
I 5. fa P i - i
*""'nar&
an na - a
Si - me
16. la
te
si - ih
& u 2 la
fe
ru
17. la
ta - pal - lab3
La
ta - tar
r 8 . i s V - da - a 4 - kn
Zu
n
19. at-ta ina su-un sinniiti-ka Ji-pir
20. dzirBni *' - ha
z ~ . & i- ra - t i - Ka
m$gL
14.

"b""

narB

-

-

-

.

-

- ma
- ma
- ur

COLUMNIV.

Together with [ . . . . ] 2. T h e people
did not [ . . . .
3. T h e city of the [foe . . . . ] 4. That city
I.

I

[ . . . . .

I

. . . .

5. Unto [ . .

. . ] there was

L . . . . ]

. . . . ] . . [ . . . . 1
. . . . ] . . . [ . . . . ]
. . . . ] did not conquer them.

6. A mighty king [

7. T h e gods [
8. My hand [

g. Thou, 0 king, or ruler, or prince, or anyone
whatsoever,
10. Whom the god shall call to rule over the kingdom,
11. A tablet concerning these matters have I made
for thee, and a record have I written for thee.
12. In the city of Cuthah, in the temple E-shidlam,
13. In the shrine of Nergal, have I deposited it for
thee.
14.Behold this memorial tablet,
1 5 . And hearken unto the words thereof,
16. And thou shalt not despair, nor be feeble,
17. And thou shalt not fear, nor be affrighted.
18. Stablish thyself firmly,
19. Sleep in peace beside thy wife,
20. Strengthen thy walls,
2 I. Fill thy trenches with water,
K. 5,640,la-a&.
qK.
5,640 omits a.

1.54
22.

OTHER ACCOUNTS OF CREATION.

pi - sa - an - na - ti - &a

i'e - iin - ka
knspa - ka
ha
nzakkura - ka
1 ' - k[a a ] - nu - t i - & i ' u - r z b
. r u - k ] u - u s - m a t u b - h a - a - t i e-mid

buSa
[
24.[
23.

. . .
. . .

-

[pa - gar - ha]
u - jur
pu - ut - kn
iuZ - fhn
26. [ . . . . . . . . . ]
e
tz~- ;i - i'u
27. [ . . . . . . . . . ] - ma e ta as - nib - Su
28. [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 - k a 2
25.

-

[The lower half of the column is wanting.]

' One sign is wanting at the heginning of the line; the traces
suggest GUD, i.e. alpu-ha, "thy cattle." T h e reading of the second
sign as ka is not certain.
a I n this address to future rulers, the general moral which the
king would draw from his own history appears to be, that safety
is to be found in following the commands of the gods. Furthermore, he recommends his successors upon the throne, not to take

THE

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

" CUTHAEAN

LEGEND."

I55

Bring in thy treasure-chests, and thy corn, and
thy silver, and thy goods, and thy possessions,
And thy [ . . . 1,' and thy household stuff.
Fix firmly [the . . . 1, and build surrounding
walls.
Guard [thy body] and take heed for thy person.
[ . . . . 1, thou shalt not go out unto him,
[ . . .
1, thou shalt not draw nigh unto him.
[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . ] thy [ . . . .

.

[The lower half of the column is wanting.]

the field against an invading foe, but to shelter themselves behind
the walls of the city of Cuthah. I t will be seen from the above
translation that the text does not contain a legend of creation
(cf. p. 140 f., note I). T h e reference to Tiamat in col. i, however,
is of considerable interest from the evidence which it furnishes
with regard to the early date of the dragon-myth; see further, the
Introduction.

I.
@ssgrian Commenfaries anb @araffef Ze,tfs fo tlje
Sevenftj Ca6fef of f4e Creation 3eriee+
THESeventh Tablet of the Creation Series was a composition
which received much attention from the Babylonian and
Assyrian scribes, and specimens of three classes of commentaries have come down to us, which were compiled to
explain the whole, or portions, of its contents. The first and
most important class consists of a commentary to each line
of the text ; and of this class we have a single version
inscribed upon fragments of two large tablets, duplicates of
one another. A second class seems to have contained a kind
of running commentary to passages selected not only from
the Seventh Tablet, but also from the other tablets of the
Creation Series ; the fragment S. 747 belongs to this class of
explanatory text. A third class, represented by K. 2,107 +
K. 6,086, gives explanations of a number of titles of the god
Marduk, several of which occur in those portions of the text
of the Seventh Tablet which have been recovered. The
greate; part of this Appendix deals with these commentaries,
and with the information which they supply concerning
the contents and interpretation of the Seventh Tablet. A t
the end of the Appendix some fragments of texts are
discussed, which bear a striking resemblance to the Seventh
Tablet, and prove that the religious literature of Babylonia
included parallel texts composed on very similar lines. The
evidence which the commentaries and the fragments of parallel
texts furnish, with regard to the form and literary development
of the Creation Series, is also of considerable value.
T o the commentary of the first class, which refers to every
line of the Seventh Tablet, the following fragments belong:

+
+

+

S. I I + S. 980 S. 1,416, K. 4,406, 82-3-23, 15 I , R. 366
80-7- 19, 288 293, I<. 2,053, and K. 8,299 These six
fragments are separate portions of two large tablets, which
were inscribed with duplicate texts. I think there is little
doubt that S. 11 + S. 980 + S. 1,416 (vol. ii, pls. li ff. and lv)
and K. 4,406 (pl. livf.) are parts of the same tablet, a large
one inscribed with five or six double columns of writing on
each side; 82-3-23, 151 (pl. liv) is a smaller fragment of the
same tablet. The remaining three fragments R. 366 80-719, 288 + 293 (pls. lvi&), K. 2,oj3 (pl. lixf.), and K. 8,299
(pl. Ix) are parts of a duplicate commentary to the Seventh
Tablet. The commentary is in the form of a bilingual list,
and presupposes the existence of a Sumerian version of the
Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series ; it gives a list of the
Sumerian words, or ideograms, and opposite each word is
added its Assyrian equivalent, generally in the order in
which the words occur in the Assyrian text. The compartments, or sections, into which the columns of the commentary
are divided, refer to the separate couplets, and frequently to
the separate lines of the Seventh Tablet; and it will be seen
that it is often possible to restore the text of the Seventh
Tablet from the information which they furnish.'
The
following paragraphs deal with the sections of the commentary which have been preserved :S. 11 + S. 980, Obv., col. i (pl. li), 11. 1-10, the commentary
to 11. I and 2 of the text, read : ( I ) ["'I ASAR-RIfa-rib
(2) R U : ;ala-ra-KU(3) SAI< : mi-ril-tu (4) A : iz-ra-tu (5) SInu : ha-a-nu (6) R U : ha-nu-u (7) SAR : ie-im (8) SAR : /ru-u
( g ) M A : a-ju-u (10) SAR : ar-ku. From this we may restore
11. I and 2 of the Seventh Tablet (see the text of I<. 2,854 in
the block on p. 159) as '"'Asar-~ifa-a-ri/r mi-?if-t[i mu-kin

+

' For references to previous publications of various portions of
the commentary, see the Introduction. The text of five additional
fragments of the Seventh Tablet, which I came across after the
lithographed texts in vol. ii had been printed off (see Appendix 11),
are published in this Appendix near the paragraphs dealing with
the portions of the commentary which refer to them.

ASSYRIAN

COMMENTARIES.

'59

iz-ra-ti], and ba-nu-u &-am u hi-e mu-s'[e-~i
uv-hi-fi]. As the
verb fa-ra-Ku occurs in 1. z of the commentary, it would be

possible to take the signs GAR and RIG in 1. I as part of the
title, and transliterate the line as
ASAR-RI-GAR-RIG
; and
this would agree with the explanations of the title given in
the Seventh Tablet, as GAR = har~u(cf. Briinnow, No. I 1,962)
and RIG = uvkitu (cf. Br., No. 5,165). But in 1. I of the
Seventh Tablet the signs GAR-RIG are clearly to be rendered

["'I

b
&
'
+
W

+&+rqiE

++

<*m
m=*=Hm=-

*@

'v -m m q

Creation Series, Tablet VII, 11. 1-18(I<. 2,854).

?a-ri,K,and it is preferable to render them in this way also in

the commentary. The title "'AsAR-RI is therefore explained
as s'a-vik (as in R. 366, etc., Ohv., col. i, 1. I, "'Tu-TU is
explained as ba-a-nu) ; or, which is perhaps preferable, the
scribe wrote the two opening words of the Semitic version
of the text as a heading to the commentary.
S. I I, etc., Obv., col. i, 11. 11-16, the commentary to 1. 3 of
the text, read : ( I I ) ' A ' A ~ ( 1 ~
2 ) SA~ : hi-i-tu
~ - (13)
~ SA
~ :~ ~
mil-hu (14) ALIM : ka6-tu (I 5) SA : at-YU (16)s A : ? ~ z i l - h ~ ~ ,

ASSYRIAN

CORIMEXTARIES.

161
~

-

+

K. 2,053, Obv. (pl. lix), 11. I -4 (cf. pl. li, S.I I S. 980,
Obv., col. ii, 1. I), the commentary to I. 17 of the text, read :
(1) ZI : [ . . . . ] (2) Z I : [ . . . . ] (3) Z U : [ . . . . ]
(4) N A : [ . . . . 1. The text reads aZ-hat-siz-u7z ;;-(la1%-ma71-nd-du-IL[ . . . . ] ; 1. 2 of the commentary may
therefore be restored as ZI : [:a-bn-11~1,cf. Br., No. 2,330 ;
zu in 1. 4 is the equivalent of u-ad-du-u, and the equivalent
of N A in 1. 4 may possibly be restored as ~%-7zu,the 3 m. pl.
pron. suffix (but cf. p. 95, n. 15). S.1 1 S. 980, Obv., col. ii,
11. 2-7 (cf. also K. 2,053, Obv., 11. 5-10), which form two sections
upon the tablet, correspond to 1. 18 of the text and read :
(2) TA : a[ . . . ] (3) I ~ U: bn[ . . . ] (4) TA : i-[7za]
(5) UICI~IN: a-$[a-ti] (6)IB : zp-&-[ti] (7) GAB : Ku-%[Z-. . . 1.
The text reads ai ivz-nza-Sii-na a-$a-ti $-&-ta-[ . . . . ] ;
it is clear therefore from 1. 3 that the commentary gives
a slightly variant text, or at any rate a variant reading for
the second word in the line. Lines 8-13 (cf. also I<, 2,053,
Obv., 1. I I ) , corresponding to I. 19 of the text, read : (8) '"'do.
*' NA-ZI-AZAG-G[A](9) RU : ~ L I - ~ Z U (10)
- [ u ] I<U : ni-6n-[%]
(I I ) ZI : Ka-a-7zu (12) ALAG : 'el-Zz~??z( I 3) AZAG : te-ZiZ-tl-t,~??r.
The text reads '"'Tzz-tu ""Zi-azag Sal-SiS lin-bu-ZLmu-kiZ
te-liZ-ti; the commentary thus gives a variant form of the title,
and presupposes a longer (or an alternate) form of the line, for
no equivalents occur in the text to 11. (9) and ( 1 2 ) ; while for
mu-KiZ the text of the commentary read mu-Kin (as in I. zr
of the text, cf. 1. 23 of the commentary). Lines 14-19)
corresponding to 1. 20 of the text, read : (14) DINGIII : i-Zum
(15) TU (so glossed) : &z-a-rz (16) DU (so glossed) : !a-a-6i
(19) ZI : 77zn-ga-rn.
(17) D I N G I R : be-h71z (18) zI : ie-??z?~-%
The text reads i Z !a-a-ri <a-a-hi be-eI taS-me-e u 77za-ga-ri.
Lines 20-24, corresponding to 1. 21 of the text, read : (20) ZI :
(la-Su-u (21) AZAC : ~i-ivz-ru(22) I i A : K7~-621-ut-te-e(23) Z I :
ha-a-n[u](24) [ . . ] : /ieg[alZu]. The text reads ?1z%-ia6-:i
si-im-ri u ku-6%-ut-te-evzu-kin begaZZi.
S. 1,416, col. ii (see pl. Iv), joining S. 11, etc., gives traces
of two sectious of the commentary which should correspond
to about 1. 25 of the text. S.11 S.980, Obv., col, iii (pl. li)

+

.

+

II

162

APPENDIX I.

gives traces of three sections of the commentary. T h c third
section (I. g) begins with a title of Marduk ; this may
possibly refer to 1. 33 or 1. 35 of the text, but tlic traces of
the preceding section do not appear to correspond to 1. 32
or 1. 34. According to its position in the commentary,
however, this fragment should refer to about that portion of
the text. The fragment 82-3-23, 151 (pl. liv) includes traces
of the right half of three sectio~lsof the com~nentary; the
second section consists of the following words : z1n1-9r2u,
ir-pi-e-tu, inn-ZZL-u,
ha-ji-$a, ni-Si, ti-'-u-tu, and iza-&-nu. The
signs urn-mu, taken in conjunction with ir-pi-e-tz~,may perhaps
Z - ~ Z L at-tafi-jibe compared with the phrase M U - Z I ~ ~ir-pi-e-tu
ba-am-ma, which occurs in the explanatory text S. 747, Rev.,
1. 10 (see below, p. I jo), wliere it is followed by the comment
Mu-urn-mu = rig-vzu. W e might perhaps restore the first
line of the section as ""Mu - zuiz - nzz~,rtinni~ig across the
column ; but Mutnmu, explained as r@i>~z~,
is certainly not
the title of Mardnk, but the name of Apsu's minister ; it is
therefore possible u:?z-muin the commentary refers to Tiamat,
and may perhaps be regarded as a title (cf. Ummu-Hubur).
The sense of the second half of thc line appears to be
that Marduk is the guardian of mankind and gives them
nourishment.
K. 8,299, Obverse (pl. Ix) gives traces of the right half of
three sections of the commentary. The Reverse, 11. 3-14
give the right half of the commentary to the first two lines
preserved by the fragment K. 12,830 (see the block on
p. 163). L.ines 3-6 read : (3) [ . . . ] : ni(?)-hu-[zr]
(4) [
. ] : ki6-ra-n-te ( 5 ) [ . . . ] : ?aZ+znt takhaiii
(6) [
. . ] : ha-nu-u. The first line preserved by
K. 12,830 reads [ . . . . . ] :aZ-wrat [ . . . . . ] ;
this may conjecturally be restored as [ih-hikih-rn-a-te] ?a/-nznt
[ka@anli i6-ni-ma]. The first sign in I. 3 of I<. 8,299 is
broken and its reading as n i is not certain ; iv is possible,
as suggested in the copy on pl. Ix. Lines 7-14) from the
right half of the commentary to the second line preserved
by K. 12,830, read : (7) [ . . . 1: e-li (8) [ . . . ] :

..
.

163

ASSYRIAN COMMENTARIES.

fa-a-fu (9) [ . . . ] : (e-e-mu ( 1 0 )[ . . . ] : [ . . 17nu ( 1 1 ) [ . . . ] : [Ila-a (12) [ . . . ] : [il-da-u
( 1 3 )[ . . . ] : [ . . . ]-LzL~~z
( 1 4 )[ . . . ] : [ . . . ]-an.
The text reads [ . .
. . 1-a-!a tee[
. . . . ] 1;
the first part of the line may therefore be restored as [e-Li
fa]-a-& te-[e-mu . . . . . 1, but the restoration of the
second half of the line is not certain.
K. 4,406, Reverse,' col. i (pls. livf.), corresponding to the
fourth line preserved by the fragment K. 13,761 (see the

.

.

Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (I<. 12,830).

block on p. 164)) read : ( I ) ""GIL: ma-[ . . ] (2) I L :
fa-ku-[u] ( 3 ) MA : 12a-sa-[&(?)I ( 4 ) GIL : a-g%-[u]( 5 ) G I L :
a-fa-[YZ]( 6 ) GIL : ?'a/-t[um(?)]
(7) s"a~a-gi-e : fay-ra-[ .
1.
Of the text only the beginning of the title is preserved,
"'A-gz[l .
. . . ] ; in 1. I of the commentary the
sign A is omitted before GIL, and it is possible that ma-[ . ]
in the right half of the line is not to be taken as an
explanation of the title, but as part of the title itself. Lines
8-13, corresponding to the next line of the text, read :

.

.

.

' It is possible that the text of I<. 4,406 is from the obverse and
not from the reverse of the tablet ; see above, p. roq, n. z.

164

APPENDIX

I.
~~~~

(8) M A : ba-nu-u (9) IM : ir-s[i-tu] (lo) A N : e-[L~L-IL]
( I I ) GIS :
mu-[ . . . ] (12) G I N : k[a-a-nu(?)]( 1 3 ) UINGIR : [i-lzl?lz(?)].
Of the text only the first word, ba-nu-a, has been preserved.
Lines 14-25 correspond to the next two lines of the test,
and the title in 1. 14 may be restored from the text as
"" ZU-[LUM-MU].The next line of the text reads "MzI-ulrzmu h - a [ n . . . . . 1 ; the commentary, 11. 26-29,
evidently presupposes a variant reading for this line, for it
does not begin with the title "" Mu - u n -~M U , although
MU-UM-nl[u],
without the determinative, occurs in 11. 27
and zg.

BROKEN SURFACE

O~rvess~.
I<I<VERSL,;.
Fragment of the Scventh Tnblel of the Creation Scries (I<. 13,761).

K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 11. 1-7 give the following words in
the explanatory half of the column : i-na, i-Lu771, a-&!I,~ L - Y Z L bu-u, m - 6 u - n , e-til-luwz, and nclp-&ar-?-u?ii. They should
correspond to the fourth line preserved by thc fragment
K. 8,519 (see the blocks on p. 165)~which reads [ . . . .
Sa-,$a]-ae-mu-&a-iu. It is clear therefore that they prcsupposc
a variant reading for the line, which may perhaps bc co~ljecturally restored as i-nn i/Eui a-hi-e-fz~~UI,-OZI-U
~'~-OZI-ZL
e-til izap-/za-?,i," H e is mighty among thc gods his brethren,

ASSYRIAN CObInIENTARIES.

165

great is the lord of all ! " With e-tzZ-!zun and nap-/ialcrz~
may be compared [rzlap-bar be-Liq~z,which occurs at the end
of the preceding line preserved by K. 8 , 5 1 9 Lines 8-13,

Osvnns~.
Fragment of thc Seventh Tablct of the Creation Series (K. 8,519).

the commentary to the following line on K. 8,519, read :
(S) [.".I LUGAL-DUR-MAH
(9) LUGAL : f a r - r ~ ~(10) D U R :
mar-ha-su ( I I ) DINGIR : i-Lu?iz (12) LUGAL : be-Lullz (13) DUR-

R%vEnsx.
Fragment of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series (I<. 8,519).

dur-?na-&u. The text of K. 8,519 and its duplicate
K. 13,337 (see the block on p. 166) may be restored as
['"Lugs!-dur-ma& Tar ~rzlar-[klasilini*' be-el &r-?fza-bi. Lines
MAG:

166

APPENDIX I

14-22, the commentary to the following couplet on I<. 8,519,
read : (14) LU : Sn-n ( I 5 ) I ~ U
( D U R ?) : i-nn (16)DUR : &b-tunr
(17) LUGAL : fa7*-~zr ( 1 8 ) MAFI : ru-bu-u (19) K U ( D u n ? ) :
a-nn (20) DINGIR : i-Lunz (21) MAF: nza-'-du ( 2 2 ) MA? : si-i-yu.
The text of the two lines reads i n inn Su-bat J ~ Y Y I L - Z L - ~ ~
~UY-bu-uand [ f a ] i~znilini"' nm-'-dir' ~ i - r u . Lines 23-28,
the commentary to the following line on I<. 8,519, read:
(23) "'' A-DU-NUN-NA
( 2 4 ) A-IIU : nzil-4% ( 2 5 ) N U N : "'E-n
( 2 6 ) RU (SO glossed) : ba-nu-u (27) DINGIR : i-Lunz ( 2 8 ) A :
a-6u. The text may therefore be restored as [""A-dz~-nu~z-fzn]
m a - & '"E-a 6n-an ilanifi' nbe"'-.h~. Lines 2 9 - 35, the

Fragment of the Seventh Table1 of the Creation Series (I<. 13,337). Duplicate
of It. 8,519.

commentary to the following couplet on I<. 8,519, read :
( 2 9 ) RA : & - a (30) R A : a-7zn ( 3 1 ) A-[D]U: a-/ah-tu (34 [ . . ] :
[ruI1-6%-u(33) N U : la-n ( 3 4 ) R U (?) : [1nn-Sa-1zr(?)I (35)
DIN[GIR] : [i-lnnz]. The text of the two lines may therefore
be restored as Sa a - [ z a ] tnl-&&-ti ru-bu-ti-& and i[n-a
u]-maS-Sa-lu ilu ai-urn-mrc.
K. 4,406, Rev., col. iii (pls. liv and lv) givcs traces of four
sections of the commentary. Of the first section only the
ends of words in the right half of the column remain. The
second section reads : (9) [ . . . ] - SIGISSE - S I G I ~ S E
Thc sign is much defaced (cf. the traces given on pl. lv), but
is probably j-u.

I 67

ASSYRIAN C O M M E N T A R I E S .
.-

~

-

p

~

-~

-

~

(10) U D - D U : Sa-&u-u (11) RA : i-na (12) E : 6i-i-tu (13) S I G I ~ ~ E -

SIGISSE : ik-ri-bu (14) R A : m - 7 7 ~ ~ (15)
- u R A : a-!a-hu. Line 9
appears to give the end of a title of Marduk, which is perhaps
explained as fa-ku-u ziza bitati."', " W h o is exalted in the
temples" ; the second half of the line probably contained
a second explanatory phrase. Lines 16-19 read : (16) D I N G I I I :
i-Zum (17) I G I : ma&-rzl (18) [T]U : e-ri-bu (19) [ . . . ] :
hat-ru-ZL; from this it is possible to build up the line as i(ri7zi
ma-har-Su li-Se-ri-671@at-ra-fzi-uiz," Let the gods bring their
gifts into his presence" ; a reference to this line is possibly
contained in the explanatory text, S. 747, Rev., 1. 6, which
begins [ . . . . . L]i-fe-ri-bu @at-m-Su-ulz (see below,
p. 170) ; the fourth section givcs the first word of the next
line as a-di.
S. I I S. 980, Rev., col. i (pls. lii f.), and its duplicates,
K. 2,053, Rev., col. i (pls. lix f.), and R. 366 80-7-19, 293,
Rev., col. i (pl. lvii), give traces of seven sections of thc
commentary, which appcar to correspoild to a portion of the
text between 11. go and loo. S. I I
S. 980, Rev., col. ii
( I 1 ) I . 1-6, corresponding to 1. 106 of the text, read :
(1) [ . .
. 1 : [ . . . I-?'
(2) [ . . . . 1 :
[hulk-[h]a-b[u](3) [ R I A : fa-[a] (4) RA : i-7za (5) A N : Sa-77ze~e
( 6 ) D U - D U : iu-p7r-u. The text reads I . . . . - 7 ~ 1
kai~iznhaS[a . '. . . 1, so that the eiidbf the line may be
conjecturally restored as S[n i-7za Sa-me-e SZL-pu-u].L1. 7-12,
corresponding to I. 107 of the text, read: (7) M A : Lu-11
(8) RA : . ;a-ba-t74 (9) IWN-SAG-GE
: ri-e-S' nr-hut (10) AN :
ri-e-;u (1 1) Itu : ar-hat (12) [ . . 1-SA-A-xu : pa-l'n-su.
The text reads Lu-u ;n-6it rjSu.a7,hdt SZL-72%
!a-a-fu IBL-U
pal-su
[
. 1, see above, p. 106f Lines 13-21 (cf. pl. lix for
the duplicate commentary, K. 2,053, Rev., col. ii, 11. I-51,
corresponding to 1. 108 of the text, read : (13) [ ] MA : 7im-n
(14) [ ] M A : 77za-riz (15) M A : Sa-zt (16) R A : i-7Zn (17) IW
(so glossed on S.I I , etc., cf. 1. 26) : hi?-6u (IS) N E - R U
(possibly ERIM, cf. Briinnow, No. 4,603) : tn7?z-ti??z(19) ( ; I D :
e-bi-ru (20) R A : la-a (21) N E : ~za-a-&u. The text reads
ma-a s'a kiv-bit Ti-a7izat i-fib-hi-[ . , . . . 1, and from the

+

+

+

.

.

~

commentary the end of the line may conjecturally be restored
as i-ti6-bi-[ru la a-ni-hu]. Lines 22-26 ( K . 2,053, 11. 6-10),
corresponding to 1. 109 of the text, read : (22) N E : ?l!-uS-fu
(23) R A : IIL-u(24) N1-31-Ru : Ni-bi-ru ( 2 5 ) 1tA: a-kn-zu (26) Il<
(so glossed) : Air-bu. The text reads fullz-SZLZLL'"'Ni-hi-ru a-hizu hir-bi-Su. Lines 27-31 ( K . 2,053, 11. 11-14), corresponding
to 1. I 10 of the text, read : (27) RA : &-a (28) A N : hah-ha-bu
(29) AN : &?nP(e) (duplicate <a-nre-e) (30) RA (so glossed) :
a-la-Ru (31) RA (so glossed) : ha-a-nu. The text reads
i'ahahkabdni" fa-ma-me al-hat-su-nu lz-hi-ii-Lzr ; for Li-hi-il-In
the commentaries thus give the variant reading Lihi72, " h e
ordained." Lines 32-38 (K. z,o53,11. I 5-21), corresponding to
1. I I I of the text, read : (32) FAN: hi-nza (33) RI : ~i-e-7zu
(34) R I : ri-'-u (35) DINGIR : i-luuz (36) IJAR : lib-iii (37) SAG :
lib-& (38) SAG : pzr-z~b-ru. The text reads kiliza ~ i - e - uli-iri
ta-a i l E u i . ~ & - r a - S ~ ~;- m
thus for ~ ' ~ I z - ~ , ~ -the
~ V text
Z L -of
Z Lthe
~
commentaries evidently gave a variant reading. Lines 39-44,
corresponding to 1. 112 of the text, rcad: (39) I R : fi~ - ~ I Z I L - U
(40) N E - R U (see above) : tam-tin2 (41) I R : ii-[ . . ]
(42) SI : ?'a-$[if-tu] (43) IcIn : su-[a-ku] (44) liIW : [ . . . 1.
The text reads : Lih-me Ti-a~fzat
ni-jis--ta-s'n (var. %a-$if-ta-Szi)
li-si-ik u lik-ri; the commentary thus supports the variant
reading to the text.
R. 366 80-7-19, 293, Rev., col. ii (pl. ivii), I. I, which
reads [
. . 1 : [ $a]-a-t[i],corresponds to the last word
of 1. 114 of the text. Lines 2-8, corresponding to 1. I 15 of the
text, read: ( 2 ) I R : sVu-u (3) A X : ai-rzr (4) a:-ru : Sa-~uu-u
(5) R U (SOglossed) : ba-nu-u (6) n u : pa-ta-+!r (7) R U : d m ni-ni (8) dan-lzi-nu : ir.!iti7?z(tim). The text reads af-fu a:-~i
ib.na-a $-ti-& dun-ni-un ; 11. 4 and S of the commentary
explain airu as referring to heaven, and daizaiizl~as refcrring
to the earth; a reference to this line also possibly occurs in
the explanatory text, S. 747. Rev., 1. 10 (see below, p. 170).
Lines 9-13, corresponding to 1. I 16 of the text, read : (9) E N
KUR-I<UR (i.e. 6Pl mdtdtij : ~ u m - f u(10) M A : izr-inu (1 1) MA :
na-bu-u (1.2) A : a-bu (13) E N I ~ U R - I ~ U:W ""EN-LIL (i.e.
f'"BiL) ; 1. 9 thus explains 6iL mEtAti as " his name,"

+

.

A S S Y X I I ~ N COI\IMKNTAl<IES.

I 6~

-

i.e. Marduk's name, and I. 13 givcs it as the title of Enlil,
or the elder HFl, who in the text transfers it to Mardub.
The text of the line reads be J 7 i ~ d l d t S
i Z L ~ L it-ta-hi
- ~ Z L n-bi
""BZZ. Lines 14-17, corresponding to 1. 117 of the text,
(15) A N : ""Igi,ui (16) 1 I A : ni-6u
r e a d : (14) M A : i
(17) UzU : nng-bu. The text'keads d - r i (var. ina oih-g,i)
,nr Igfgi im-bu-u nn-gab-ft~-un. Lines 18-23, corresponding
to 1. 118 of the text, read : (18) [ . . . 1 : Se-mu-ZL
(19) [ . . . 1 : ' " ' [ E - a ] (20) [ . . . 1 : k[n-bit-tu]
(21) [
] L I : m-[ . . . ] (22) [
] LI : na-,o-[7~-u]
(23) [ ] LI : /ii-[ . . , 1. The text of thc line reads
if-me-ma "'E-n ha-bit-ta-sir i-te-eiz-gu; the text of the
commentary therefore gave a fuller form for tlie second half
of the line. Lines 24-27, corresponding to 1. I 19 of the text,
read : (24) A : ma-[a] (25) A : n-[hu] (26) A : f u r - T [ ? L - & ~ ]
(27) M A : s i h - [ ~ i ] .The text of thc line reads iiza-n i n nh2."'-fu
z~-&r-ri-&u.ad-nr-u-SZL.
A t this point the scribe of 15. 366, ctc., ceases to give the
commentary in the forin of a bilingual list, and in 11. 28-34
he writes out the text of the Assyrian version of 11. 120-124
of the composition. Then follows a colophon of three lines
which read : (35) niz-nzl-z6-tu(?)ul hala u [ . . . . . ]
(36) fa LI silnzPP' fa [ . . . . . ] (37) fa inn libhi
'"'Asar-ri [ . . . . . 1, " These are not all (?) and
[ . . . . . ] of the fifty-one names of [ . . . . . ]
which are in (the composition entitled) ' Asari [ , , . . . I.'"
The reading of 1. 35 is not certain, but the colophon scems
to imply that the commentary was not complete, or else that
the fifty (or fifty-one) names of Marduk were not all given
in the composition' itself. Twb iilnportant facts inay be
deduced from the colophoii. The first is that the Sevcnth
Tablet of the Creation Series is here treatcd as an independent
composition which takes its title from its opening line. The
second is that in this independent form the composition endcd
with 1. 124 of the tablet. I t is clear, therefore, that 11. 125-142
of tlie Seventh Tablet are in the nature of an epilogue, which
was added to the cotnposition at the time it was iticorporated
as the concluding tablet in the series Enzinzic elif.

The supposition t h a t the text of the Seventh Tablet ended
originally a t 1. 124 receives additional support from the
' explanatory text S. 747 (see Cutzeifoonn Texts, pt. xiii, pl. p).'
When complete it is probable that the tablet, of which S. 747
formed a part, contained a kind of running commcntary to
the whole of the Creation Series ; only fragments of the
beginning and of the end of the commentary are prescrved
by S. 747, and these refer to thc First Tablet and to the
Seventh Tablet of the Series respectively. Thus, S. 747, Obv.,
1. I, which reads [ . . . .
] I-iS-tz~-u,-a-~z.zl-SZJ-un,
followed by the comment ,-a-ru-u = [ , . . . . 1, rcfers
to Tablet I, 1. 3 ; 1. 3, which reads [ . . . . . . - t ] i
su-JU-u unp-pa-[ . . . 1, refers to Tablet I, I. 6 ; and the
mention of E n in 1. 5 is in accordaiice with the prornilient
part which the god plays in Tablet I, in detecting and
defeating the plot of Apsu and Tiamat. On the other hand,
the reverse of S. 747 appears to deal with tlie Seventh Tablet
of the Series ; thus, 1. 3 may pcrhaps be compared with tlie
equation sux = '"'E-n, given by I<. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 25,
in the commentary to a line of the Seventh Tablet (see above,
p. 166) ; 1. 6 possibly contains a reference to the line of the
Seventh Tablet to which the commentary I<. 4,406, Rev.,
col. iii, 11. 16-19? corresponds (see above, p. 167) ; tlie words
in 1. 10, [ . . . ] dnn-7zi-7zn (or [ . . . u]-dniz-7zi-7zn)
ir-si-tunz, possibly refer to 1. 1 1 5 of the Seventh Tablet,
while the second half of the same line perhaps contains
a reference to the line of the Scventh Tablet, to which
the commentary 82-3-23, 1 5 I, section z, corresponds (see
above, p. 162, and for the verb zrt-tnh-ji-biz-nnz-nzn, cf.
Tablet V , 1, 20) ; and the words 7.i-e-fu nr-kn-tzd in 1. 11
clearly rcfer to 1. 107 of the Seventh Tablet. Line 1 2 of
S. 747 q u o t e d . 124 of the Scventh Tablet, follolvecl by the
explanatory equations L (ie. " Fifty ") = @a-n7z-fn-a (i.e.
Mardulc's last title) and L =""Bd. Now, as I. 12 is tlie last
line of S. 747, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the

.

- -I

See above, p. I 57.

TITLES OF MARDUK.

171

portion of text it explains came a t the end of the cotnposition to which the commentary refers.
The tablet K.2,107 K. 6,086 (pls. lxif.), which has already
been referred to,' is not strictly a commentary to the Seventh
Tablet of the Creation Series, but is of value for explaini~ig
some of the titles of Marduk which occur therein. The
second column is subdivided by a perpendicular line ; in the
left half of the column are inscribed the titles of Marduk, and
in the right half the explanations are set opposite them.
Lines 9-18 form a single section, and probably give a nurnber
of alternative explanations referring to a single title which
was written in the left half of 1. 9. I n the following transliteration of the text a translation of each Assyrian rendering
in the right half of the column is added beneath it :-

+

TITLE.

i. [

wantins.

[

wmlinz.

2.

EX~.I.AN~TION.

] : [ . . . . . 1-7zi ma-tivz a h u PZZ-Si
"[The . . . ] of land, city, and people."

]

:

[

. .
"[The

. 77za - ~ i ] i 7 z ali 2
n i - Si
. of Ialnd, city, and people."

3. [ wantins.

] : [ . . . . . ] ~tzns'-ki-tinnn ali u izi-ti
"[The . . . , ] of drink unto city and
people."

4. [

mrantinp.

]

5. [

wanting.

:

.

[ . . . . ] a-li-id '"'Sin u ""Snl~zns'
"[The . . . ] Begetter of the Moon and
the Sun."

] : [ . . . ] ??a$-&a~
6e-Zi a-ia-rid nn$-bar 6e-li
"[The . . . ] of all lords, the Chief of all
lords."

6. [ wanting. ]

:

[

. . . . . -n]i ka-la t i - m e - a - t i
"[The Creator(?)] of all words(?)."

' See above, p.

157,

Ex~~n~n'r~ux.

TITLE.

7.

. . .

[

"

. -n]i ?zap-bar ti-me-a-ti'
[The Creator(?)] of all words(?)."

8. [ wanting. ] : [ . . . 1" Say ha-Za iii u Sarvi
"[The . . . ] of the [ . . . 1, the icing
of all gods and kings."

9. [
10.

wn~~tiug. ]

:

[

. .

.

[

. .
"[The

.

]
i&i*
"[The . . . ] o f t h e gods."

. .

[

"[The
12.

,

Sam]e(e)
u
--itiuz(ti?n)
, . of healven and earth."

. fa.z2](e) w
irsiLi?n(tim)
. . . of'heave~l]andearth."

[ . . .
"[The

. . . . . . . ] "'B2.l
. . . . . ] of Bcl."
be-/urn [ . . . ianz]e(e) u ir:iti7~z(tim)
" T h e Lord [ . . . ] of heaven and
earth."
be - LZL~IZ
a - Si - i y
iZ6ni"'
" The Lord, the Blesser of the gods."

be - Zwne
g a - 71ee - i L
i i ~ u"Ii
" T h e Lord, the Benefactor of the gods."

b e - l u m Sa e - m u - & a - a - f u f a - & - a
" T h e Lord, whose might is supreme."
be

- eZ

BZ6ili
" T h e Lord of Babylon."

18.

71rz~d- diS
B66ili Kf
" The Renewer of Babylon."
-

~~

-

~

~~~

~

p

~

-

~

' This line gives a slightly variant explanation of the title in 1. 6.

~

p

I73

TITLES OF 'MARDUJC.
TITLE.

EXPLANATION.

19. "'LUGAL-EN-AN-I<I-A
: he-el iLi?zin'i'n Sam2 u i~*~iti
Snl,
iLBni*' fa Tam? u i&i
'I The Lord of the gods of heaven
and earth, the Icing of the
gods of heaven and earth."
""E - a
20. ""'H - DU - N U N - NA : liln - lib
"'6d
The Counsellor of RE1 and Ea."
21.

i 2 " T ~-

:

TU

91~1~-al-Zid
ilZnin' ??zf~-ud-di-ii
ilini*'
" T h e Begetter of the gods, the
Renewer of the gods."

22.

""Gu -

:

Gu

71zu - tnh

-

Rhil

iLBnir'

" T h e Strengthei~erof the gods."

23. ""Mu

-

MU

:

24. '"'Du

-

TU

:

?nu - us" - pi - 2;
i/8ni9'
" T h e . . . of the gods."
6n - 7zi
Rn - la
ilBni#'
" T h e Creator of all the gods."

25.

"'Du

26. ""Mu

-

DU

:

-

AZAG

:

m u - ut - in?,- Y I-~IA
ilazi*/
" The Leader of the gods."
fa
si' - pat - su' el - Zit
"Whose Illcantation is pure."

27.

"'MU

28. "'

-

SAG( -

AZAC

SUD) -

zu

tu - z& - ~ Z L
ez - zit
"Whose Spell is pure."

:

?a

:

mu-di-eLibhi iL7zi."'lhi6-6~~
ru-u-/I.u
ef-SzL)
"Who knolveth the heart of the
gods, the wide heart (recent
break)."
-

--

~

.

' The note i - b i PI-$u, which is written in smaller characters,
signifies that the end of the line was broken in the original tablet
from which the scribe was copying.

TITLE.

ZI ( - do.) -

29.

30. ""ZI (

31.

'ta'

-

do.)

SUEJ( - do.)

32. *ii'[

...

EXPI.ANATION.

UICIUN :

m ~ p- fat
nap - &ar
iZEfzis'
"The Life of all the gods."

-

fa - bu - ti
~za - si - i&
" T h e Remover 1 of the mighty."

:

SI

6al - Zz - -u
ni - bi
" T h e Destroyer of the foe."

- IWR : ~ I Z U -

I(-do.)-ICUR: m.z~-baZ-Zz~-z~
nap-jza~ai-bi na-si-i@
~ag-gi
" T h e Destroyer or all foes, the
Remover of the wicked."
na - si - ik ?zap - @7,
YQ - gi
" T h e Remover of all the wicked."

33. [

Wanting.

]

:

34. [

Wanting.

]

:

35. [

Xmting.

]

:

36. [

Wanting.

1

:[ .
"[ .

[ . . . r a ] ~ - p e-fu-u
'
mag-gi
"[The .
of the] wicked ; the
Annihilator of the wicked."
[

. . .

f,ag]-gi e-hl-u ?zap-/iav
rag-gi
"[The .
of the wickled; the
Annihilator of all the wicked."

. . . . . . . .

]-ti

. . . . . . . . . I."

In the earlier part of the text the titles which were given on
the left side of the column in 11. 1-6 and 8 and 9 are wanting,
but the explanations on the right side recall many phrases
of the Seventh Tablet, from among which rve may compare
those given in 1. 5 with the end of the 3rd line preserved by
the fragment I<. 8,519 (see above, p. roqf), and that in 1. 16
with the 4th and 14th lines of the same fragment. Of the

' I.e., "Destroyer."

PARALLEL TEXTS TO TAULET VII.

175

titles given in 11. 19 ff., compare 1. zo with 'b'A-dz~-7z~~?z-7za
and
its explanation in the 8th line preserved by I<. 8,519 ; 1. 21
~ i t h * ~ ' T u -in
t u 1. g of the Seventh Tablet (see above, p. 92f) ;
1. 27 with "'Mz~-aznxin 1. 33 (see above, p. gS 6) ; 1. 28 with
'b'Jaf-zu in 1. 35 (see above, p. 98f.) ; 1. 29 with *'Zi-z~hkin-7za
in 1. 15 (see above, p. 94f.) ; 1. 30 with io'"Zi-siin 1. 41 (see
above, p. roof.); and 1. 31 with "'Sub-kur in I. 43 (see
above, p. ~ o o f ) . I t is possible that col. i of the Obverse of
K. 2,107 + K. 6,086 (see pl. lxi) also contained explanations
of the Seventh Tablet, or a t any rate referred to the Creation
. . .
Series, as 1. 4 reads [ . . . . . 1 dpszi and I. 15 [
Ti (?)]-amat.
I t was stated on p. 157 that fragments exist of compositions
very similar in character to the Seventh Tablet of the
Creation Series. Remains of one such composition are
preserved by the fragmcnt of a Neo - Babyloi~ian tablet,
No. 54,228, the text of which is published in vol. ii, pl. lxiii,
and by its two Assyrian duplicates, R. 395 (see vol, ii, pl. lxii)
and K. 2, 538 (see the block on p. 176). R. 2, 538 is
a duplicate of No. 54,228, Obv., 11. 6-15 ; R. 395, Rev., 11. 3-5
correspond to No. 54,228, 11. 8, 10, and 12. The Obverse
of R. 395, which does not correspoiicl to any portion of the
text preserved by the other two fragments, reads as follows :-

. .

.

I.[

3.ni

. . .

.

. ] 2.[ I"'[
2 6 - 6 n - s i ' - [ 7 n ] a "'[

.

. . . . 1
. . . . ]

4. z)-te-?rz(z i ~ t nin*" J'n 1z(i~E2i[*. . . .

5.

e

. 1

-pi< zi6 - 6nt - sn tur - ma [ . . . . . ]

6. ri - es"

tn - Inn? - t i

7. is"- mi - ma
8. i E -

'"'B~L'pri

??zit- fa

Si - 7nn

9. is-221 [

.

it - b[n -

.

.

.

.

]

- ju
i[71z

[
-

10. ""[

.
.

.

. ]
,
. . . 1
,
. . . . ]
. . . . . ]
,

.

If this fragment is in the form of narrative, it follows that
11. 1-6 are the concluding lines of a speech, since 1. 7 reads

. . . . I." BE1 did not
answer, however, for 1. 8 reads " H e raised the club [ . . . . I."
Now the phrase ii-fi-ma nzil-!a occurs in Tablet IV of the
Creation Series, 1. 37, but the context on this fragtnent does
not suggest a variant account either of the arming of Marduk
for battle or of the actual fight rvith Tiamat. Moreover,
the Reverse of the fragment, which is in part a duplicate of
No. 54,228 and R. 2, 538 (see above), is inscribed with
addresses in honour of Marduli undcr some of the titles

" BE1 hearkened and his mouth [

Fraglllent of n ilarnllei t c x t la the Seventit Tablet of the Creation Series
( R . 2 , 538). Duplicate of No. gq,zzS.

which occur on the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series.
I t is therefore probable that the Obverse of R. 398 contains
a part of the same composition. Line 4, which reads I' H e
opened [ . . . . ] at the sources of the rivers [ . . . . I,"
would in that case refer to some act of creation on the part of
Marduk, and the lines which follo~vwould celebrate incidcnts
in the battle with Tiarnat.

PARALLEL TEXTS TO TABLET VII.

I77

O n l y a few traces of characters are preserved o n t h e
Reverse of R. 395, but enough is left t o prove t h a t 11. 3, 4,
a n d 5 are duplicates of No. 54,228, Obv., 11. 8, 10, a n d 12.
T h e following is t h e t e x t of No. 54,228 with restorations a n d
variants from R. 395 and R, 2 , 538 :OBV.
I. [
] ba [ .
] 2. [ . . . . ] "'Ea i b - [ . . . . ]

....

...

3. li .pu - us" iz - r i .[ . . . . . . . . . I
4. i&
a . rik
is' - bur(?) nu' - [ . . . . . 1
5.
GI$ - G I D - D A a - rik
[ . . . . . . . l2
6. sr"Asar.ri a - i
ine - [risV-t i 3 .
. . . 1
7.
is - ra - tunz
a . [ . . . . . . . . . .]
8 . 6 ~ - n u - u ie-inz
u
gu-e [ . . . . ]
9.
g[u] - u 4
$2' - bir - t [ u . . . . . . .
I
6a .atz
te - dis'- [ti- i u - nu . . . . I
10. "'Tu - tu
11.
iuwz ilBnipd s"a ma - & a - z i 6 [ . . . . ]
~ z . " ' " s ' a ~ - z um u - d i - e l i 6 - 6 i .iZ[dnipi7 . . . . ]
13.

" ' S a g - g a r ( ? ) s 6 a - r u - u Lib-bi [

.

.

,

. 1

Possibly &[a- . . . 1.
I t will he noticed that 11. 4-17 are written in couplets, the
second half of each couplet being set hack a little from the edge
of the tablet. It is just possible that these second lines give
explanations of phrases in the lines which precede them. I t
appears on the whole more probable, however, that they form part
of the actual text; in that case the couplets in 11. 8 f., l o f., and
1 2 f. are written as single lines on the fragment R. 395.
Restored from Tablet VII, 1. I , see above, p. 92.
So the traces upon No. 54,228 appear to read; R. 2, 538
ip;lu-urn.
--Q. 395, ni.
For I. I r , R. z, 538 reads ina Bfi6iliKr[ . . . . . 1.
The tracas of the followinp lines upon R. -.
1 9
- do not corres~ond
to the portions of the text preserved by No. 54,228.
R. 2, 538 omits the title at the beginning of the line.
I2

178

APPENDIX I.

.

.

.

]

tam - tum b[n(?)-

.

.

]

15.

n u - m a d S u - ' - u 1 gnu-Sub-&

17.

"'Tutu

1 9 . s " ~ inn

'"'Marduh
ri-e-Si

20.

"'Nabzi

ina

21.

'"'A - du - nun

zz.

"' Ninib

BAR

- na
'I"

u

gun?&

. . . . I
VIKAN[ . . . . ]
[ . . . . . I
. . . . . . . I

ar-ha-[ti3

- N A M *14 z%nu
ma

[

- 2%

'I"

ib .[

3 . g i - p a - r i [ . . . ] 4. m i - [ . . 1 - r i ( ? ) - [ . . . . ]

5. i r .si .tum [ . . . ] 6. [ . . . . ]-ma [ . . . . ]
Fragmentary as the text of No. 54,228 is, a glance at the
above transliteration will suffice to show that it preserves
part of a composition which is very similar in character to
the Seventh Tablet. That it does not form a missing portion
of the text of that composition, is clear from the occurrence
of certain phrases and titles of Marduk found in parts of the
text of the Seventh Tablet which have already been identified ;
moreover, they are here arranged in a different order and
with a different context. Thus, 1. 6 f. correspond to the
--

--

' R. z, 538. i.
In this and the following line TU
flate sign.
Conjectural restoration.
4 Possibly inaparakkiJ?m~fi~~.
2

+ TW

is written as a con-

PARALLEL TEXTS TO TABLET VII.

I79

opening line of Tablet V I I ; 1. 8 corresponds to Tab. VII,
1. 2 ' ; 1. 10 corresponds to Tab. V I I , 1. g ; 1. 12 corresponds
to Tab. VII, 1. 35: and 1. 13 may be compared with the
second half of the same line ; 1. 19 is clearly parallel to
Tab. V I I , 1. 107; 1. 21 corresponds to the line of Tab. V I I
preserved by K. 8,519,1. 8 (see above, p. 104) ; with "'&ans"ri
in 1. 2 2 , cf. Tab. VII, 1. 123; and with 1. 23, cf. K. 8,519,
1. 8, and the commentary to this line, K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii,
1. 31 (see above, p. 166, and vol. ii, pl. Iv), which gives the
reading a-lah-tu. I t may also be noted that in 11. 4 and 5
we have a reference to i!u a d z , "Long-bow," the first name
given by Anu to Marduk's bow upon K. 3,4494 which
probably forms part of the Fifth Tablet (see above, p. 82 t );
GIS-GID-DA in 1. 5 is evidently the Sumerian form of the
name. The title of Marduk, En-bilulu, which occurs in 1. 14,
and is there explained as "the Lord who hath renewed his
land," is found also upon the fragment K. 5,233, which is
described in the following paragraph.

' I t may here he noted that on the fragment S. 298 occur
. . . 1 bu-nu-u fe-im u klle mu-di!-iu
the phrases [
[ . . . .
1, " [ . . . 1, Creator of grain and plants,
. . 1" ; as two other lines of the same
Renewer of [
. . . 1 mud-fe-Si-ru a-d[i- . . . . 1,
fragment read [ .
"[
. . ] Director of the decrees of [ . . I," and [ . . . .
ha]-nu-u le-ni-fit [
. 1, '' [ .
. ] Creator of
mankind [ . .
.
it is clear that the fragment is part of
a composition containing addresses to Marduk as lord of Creation.
Too little is preserved to show whether in this text, as in the
Seventh Tablet, he was addressed under his Sumerian titles.
' On an Assyrian fragment of a hymn, K. 12,582, occurs the
following couplet :' " ~ u g - z mu-di-e
u
lib-d[i . . . . . . . . . . . . ]
a-pir a-gi-e 6~Z~~-u-tu
[
. . . . . . . . . . . I
" Sag-zu, who knoweth the heart [of the gods . . . .
1
"Who weareth the crown of dominion [ . . . .
. I."
It is possible that this fragment also belonged to a composition,
similar in character to the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series.

.

..

.
. .

.
.

.
... .
. . I,"

..
.. .

.

.

. .

.

.

I 80

APPENDIX I.

I t has already been remarked that the commentaries to
the Seventh Tablet presuppose the existence of a Sumerian
version of the text, and in the fragment K. 5,233, the text of
which is given in the accompanying block, we may see
a confirmation of this supposition. The fragment is part of
an Assyrian tablet inscribed with a bilingual composition,
and in each line of the Sumerian text which is preserved
Marduk is addressed under a new title. In the following

Fragment of a bilingual composition in honour of Mal-iiuL (I<. 5,233).

transliteration and translation of the fragment the first couplet
preserved is numbered "I," but it should be noted that it
does not mark the beginning of the text :I.

[D'NC'R

.
""

.

.

.

Mardzlk

]

MU-BI

-

fa tz~ u

-

[
[ . . .

]
.

.

.

. ]

Marduk, whose spell [ . . . . . . . . ] !

RILlNGUAL ADDRESS TO MARDUIC.

2.

3.

D ' N G J R A s ~ ZI
~ SU-UD-GAL-[
~ - ~ ~ ~ .~ . ~.
'"'Marduk nn .din na -$[is"- ti(?) . . .
Marduk, the giver of [life . . . . . .
DlNGIii

181

- . ~1 ~ ~ - ~ ~
. ]

. I!

. . . NAM-ISIB-BA-A-NI-I~U GA[R- . . . . 1
'"'Rarduk fa znn s"$ .ti- Su Z i - [ . . . . 1
Marduk, who by his incantation [ . . . ] !

.TU
4. DfivG1xT~
SAR - AZAG - GA - BI
[ . . . . . ]
~z~'Mavd;.&
& ina S A R - A Z A G - ~ ~[- S .~ . . . ]
~ a r d kwho
, by his . . . [ . . . . . ] !

5.

DrNdrx

SAG- zu

SUE .[KUR .
.
. 1
s'"MarduK *IS'Mu- bnl- [lu .u ai - 6i . . . . ]
Marduk, the Destroyer [of the foe . . . . I!
DiNGIE

6. D r N C I X-EBI~ - LU ""Mardzck
Marduli,

LU

GAB-[.

. . . . . . ]

?nu . [ . . . . . . .
who [ . . . . . . .

1
I!

It is possible that the title in 1. I may be restored as
from Tab. VII, 1. 33. Of the other titles
under which Marduk is here addressed, ASARU-ALIM-NUNA
2) occurs in Tab. VII, 1. 5, TUTU(1. 4) in Tab. VII, I. g,
SAG-zu (1. 5) in Tab. VII, 1. 35, and SUH-KUR
in Tab. VII,
1. 43. The restoration of the Assyrian version of 1. 5 is taken
from K. 2,107 K.6,086, Ohv., col. ii, I. 31 (see above, p. 174,
and vol. ii, pl. Ixii). The title EN-BILULU
also occurs in the
parallel text to the Seventh Tablet preserved by No. 54,228
and R. 2, 538 (see above, p. 178 f.).

lilNG1.Q MU-AZAG

(3.

+

182

APPENDIX I1

11.

O n eome fragment5 of fqe 9eriee
"&numa efieq," anb on ~ o m ete,xte refating to fqe
@ieforg of Creafion.
IN this appendix some unpublished fragments of tablets of
the Creation Series are given, which I came across after the
lithographed plates of vol. ii had been printed off. A t the
beginning of the present year, while engaged on making
a hand-list of the smaller fragments in the various collections
from Kuyunjik, I identified ten such fragments as belonging
to copies of the First, Second, Fifth, and Seventh Tablets
of the Creation Series. The texts of five of these (KK. 2,854,
12,830, 13,761, 8,519, and 13,337), which belong to copies of
the Seventh Tablet, are included in Appendix I under the
sections dealing with those portions of the commentary which
rendered it possible to identify them.' The texts of the
remaining five fragments (KK. 7,871, 4,488, 10,008, 13,774,
and 11,641), belonging to copies of the First, Second, and
Fifth Tablets, are given in the following sections which are
marked A, B, and C. In section D two small Assyrian
fragments (K. zz,ooob and 79-7-8, 47) are described, which
possibly contain portions of the text of the Creation Series.
In section E the text is given of the fragment (S. z,o13),
which contains a reference to Ti-amat e-Li-ti and Ti-amat
$a$-li-ti. Section F deals with the fragments K. 3,445
R. 396 and K. 14,949, which probably contain an account of
the creation of the world by AnSar, in place of Marduk. In
section G the text is given of an address to the River of
Creation which occurs in the opening lines of incantations
upon the fragments S. 1,704 and 82-9-18, 5,311. Finally, in

+

' It may be noted that all of them have been used for the text
of the Seventh Tablet as transliterated and translated on pp. 92 ff.

FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

183

section H the tablet K. 3,364, which has been supposed to
contain the instructions given by Marduk to man after his
creation, is shown to be part of a long text containing moral
precepts.
A. TWOFRAGMENTS O F T H E FIRSTTABLETO F T I i E
CREATIONSERIES.
-The fragment K. 7,871, the text of
which is given in the accompanying block, is from the right-

Creation Scrics, Tablet I, 11. 33-47 (K. 7,871).

hand edge of the obverse of a tablet, and the ends of lines
which it preserves correspond to Tablet I, 11. 33-47 AS the
first sheet of this volume had been printed off at the time
I came across it, the information it supplies as to this
imperfectly preserved portion of the text of the First Tablet'
may be briefly noted.

' See above, pp.

6-9.

I 84

APPENDIX I1

I n 1.33 the new fragment supports the reading sakrpu a t the
end of the line ; in 1. 34 it confirms the suggested restoration
[ma-ri-e-i'u-un],probably reading [ m ~ v ~ ] " - & - u z; the couplet,
11. 35 and 36, which may be conjecturally restored as Ap[szi
pa]-a-iu i-pu-[;a?%-mai-hub-621, a-na [T]i-anz[at]el-Zi-tu-ma
i-za[h-hara-ma-tum],it condenses into a single line which may
probably be restored as [Apszipa-a-fui-pu-ism]-ma izakkar-fi,
" [Apsii opened his mouth] and spake unto her" ; the end of
1. 37 may now be restored as aZ-hat-sf~-nue-li-ia, i.e. "their
way [is . . . . ] unto me " ; the suggested restoration of the
end of 1. 38 as mu-& [la ~a2-la-ah]is confirmed, the fragment
reading [ . . . . . ] Za fa-al-la-ku ; the end of 1. 39
may now be restored as lu-iizp-pi-i/i, i.e. "Their way will
I destroy and cast down" ; the suggested restoration of the
end of 1. 40 as [ni-i-nil is confirmed, the fragment reading
ni-i-n[i]; the suggested restoration of the end of 1. 41 as i-nu
[Se-mi-Sa] is confirmed, the fragment reading ina fe-mi-e-[fa].
The suggested restoration (from Tab. IV, 1. Sg and Tab. 111,
1. 125) of the phrase iZ-ta-si e-li-[ta] in 1. 42 is shown to be
incorrect, the fragment reading [ . . . . . ] efi 4av-mi[ . . ] ; the line should run i-zu-nz-ma (var. [el-zz--m[a])
iZ-ta-si e-Zi (var. e f i ) bar-mi-[fa(?)]. For the end of 1. 43
K. 7,871 reads [ . . . . . ]-gat e-diS-Si-[ . . 1, and the
verb preserved by No. 45,528 46,614 (see vol. ii, pl. iii) may
probably be read uz-[g]u-ga[t]; the line may thus be partly
restored as [ . . ] mar-si-2' ug-[g]u-ga[t]e-diS-Si-[ . . . . . 1,
" [ . . ] she was grievously angered, alone [she . . . . ] " ;
K. 7,871 probably gave a variant reading for the verb, as the
traces it gives of the sign before gat (or kat) are not those of
gu.2 The suggested restoration of the end of 1. 44 as a-na
[Apsa i-zak-kar] is shown by K. 7,871 to be incorrect, the
fragment reading [ . . . . . ] a-na hay-Si-[ . . ] ; the

+

It may here be noted that the principal traces of this line upon
the obverse of 81-7-27, 80 (see Cun. Txfs., part xiii, pl. z) probably
represent the word mar-~i-is'.
The restoration of the line as [ . . ] mar-si-is'~ g - [ g ] u - ~ a t
e-[ . . . ]-Rat e-dG-Si-[
. ] is also possible.

.

FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET I.

185

line may probably he restored as Li-!nut-ta (var. ti) it-la-di
a-na Kay-Si-[ia (01, " She plotted evil in [her] heart (?)." The
end of 1. 45, according to the fragment, reads [ . . . . . 1-n
nu-uJ-&aL-lak; it is possible that we may restore the line as
[mil-nu-a ni-i-nu Sa xi-i[p-pu-us' Zu]-u nu-us'-&&a&, " What,
then, shall we d o ? Let us destroy ! " The end of 1. 46,
.
. 1-du-tu daaccording to the fragment, reads [ .
[ . . 1 ; unless this represents a variant reading, the
suggested restoration i ni-[i;-LaZ ni-i-nil is incorrect. For

Creation Series, Tablet I, 11. 50-63 (I<. 4,4S8)

1. 47 the fragment reads [ . . . . . ] i-[ . . . . . 1,
which corresponds to i-ma-nl-[Li-ku]at the end of the line.
Another new fragment of the First Tablet is K. 4,488,
which gives portions of the second halves of 11. 50-63 ; for
the text see the accompanying block. For 11. 50 and 51 the
.
. ]
fragment reads [ . . . . . m]u-$is' l [ u .
and [ . . . . . ] inz-me-ra $[a- . . . . . 1, and
gives no variants to the text as known from other tablets ;

186

APPENDIX 11.

.

for 1. 52 the fragment reads [
. . . . i]&-pu-duan i h n i
lnrirC . . . 1, which gives the variants an for a-na and
mrir[P'*'-&]
for m[a]-ri-e-iu; the fragment reads [ . . . 1ti-di-ir &Sad-[ .
] for 1. 53, which may probably be
restored as [ . . . . ] i-te-dir (var. [ . 1-ti-di-ir) hi-Sad[su], "[ . . . . his] neck was troubled." For 1. 54 the
fragment reads [ . . . . . - i ] u u-na-iak fa-a-[ . . ] ;
it is clear, therefore, that for the restoration [i]-nu-fa-knwe
should read [u]-na-fa-&,and that the duplicate 81-7-27, 80
reads u-nu-as'-:a[&], as suggested on p. 1 1 , n. 8. For 1. 5 5
the fragment reads [ . . . . . ] pu-u/i-ru-US-[
];
for the suggested reading (upon 81-7-27, 80 and No. 46,803)
bu-[ulk-n'-Sn-un, "their first-born," we should read pu-[a]&ri-fu-un, "they all," or "their assembly," and the line may be
translated ''[Because of the evil] which they had planned
together."
For 1. 56 the fragment reads [ . . . . . flu-nu uS-tan-nu-[ . . 1, and gives no variants to the text ;
the verb a t the end of 1.57 may be restored froin the fragment
as i-dul-Ln, "they lay in wait."= For 1. 58 the fragment reads
[
. . . . 1-ku-urn-me$ uf-[ . . 1, and confirms the

.

.

.

. .

'

.

' The traces of this sign upon No. 46,803 are those of u/i, rather
than uk (see vol. ii, pl. ix).
This verb occurs also in Tablet I, I. 89, which reads [ . . . ]
i-du-ul-[li],i.e. " [ . . . . ] he lay in wait," and again in
1. 99, which reads [ . . . . . 1-hi-i: ta-du-ul-qi], i.e.
" [ . . . . 1 thou hast lain in wait!'
The meaning of the
verb ddlu has been pointed out by Thompson in Nebmica, vol. xvii,
p. 163, note 3, where he shows that its participle occurs in an
Assyrian letter in the sense of "scout" ; he also cites IV R, pl. 30*,
Ohv., 1. 16, where i-du-[ul](var. i-dul) may well have the meaning
"to prowl" or "to lie in wait." On p. 1 3 , note I I and p. 66,
note 5 it was suggested that the verb i-[ul-lu-Eu,which occurs in
Tablet IV, 11. 63 and 64, should be transliterated i-dul-lu-fu and
connected with the verbs in Tablet I, 11. 89 and 99. The reading
i-[nl-lu-&~,
suggested by Delitzsch, gives good sense, hut is not
quite satisfactory from the omission of the doubled dental. Jensen
(cf. K.B., vi, pp. 24 f., 334) reads i-dul-lu-fu,and also suggests for

.

FRAGMENTS OF CR. SER., TABLETS I AND

11.

I87

suggested restoration of the second half of the line as
[fa-ku-um]-mi-is" uf-bu. Of 1. 59 the fragment gives the end
as [ .
. .
]-A% te-li-i-['(?)],the traces of the last sign
1 ; in 1. 60 it gives the variant me-hi-fu-n[u]
reading HI[
for me-Ki-Su-u7z ; of 1. 61 it gives the last word as [ . . . . . ]
u-[u], '[
. . , ] he watched him " ; in 1. 62 it gives
the variant el-lu for el-lum, and of 1. 63 it only gives slight
traces of two signs.
B. A FRAGMENT OF TIIE SECOND
TABLET
OF THE
CREATION SERIES. The fragment K. 10,008 is probably
a fragment of the Creation Series, and if this is so the only
place to which it is possible to assign it is the gap between
11. (85) and (104) of the Second Tablet (see above, p. 32 f ) ;
this will be clear for the following reasons. I t will be seen
that the greater part of the fragment is inscribed with part
of a speech of Ansar. Lines 10 and I I read [
. . . .
"']A-nam u l i-Zi-'-[ . , . , . ] and [ . . . . . ]-mud i-d7~v-~tza
i-t[u- . . . . . 1, and may be restored as [af-$?rr-ma ""]A-nam
u l i-&-'-[a ma-bar-fa], ['"'Nu dim]-mud i-duv-??za i - t [ u - ~ a
ar-his'], "[I sent] Anu, but he could not [withstand her];
[Nudimlmud was afraid and turned [back]." Now these
lines occur in Tablet 111, 1. 53 f., in the course of AnSar's
instructions to Gaga, and again in 1. I I I f., in AnSar's message
as delivered by Gaga to Lahmu and Lahamu. Now, although
the phrase "'Mardulz n6haL ilEni occurs in the following line
in each of these passages, the rest of the context upon
K. 10,008 shows that it is not a duplicate of the Third
Tablet. I t therefore follows that the fragment cannot belong
to a later tablet than the Second.
Now 11. (72)-(82) of the Second Tablet describe how Aniar
sent Ann against Tiamat, and it is probable that in the gap

.

.
.

.

-

.

-

dzlu the meaning "to run round," "to prowl round." In view
of the use of the participle in the sense of "scout," we may perhaps
render the phrase in Tablet IV, 11. 63 f. as "the gods watched him
from hiding" ; the repetition of the phrase empbasises Marduk's
courage in setting out alone to do battle with Tiamat.

after 1. 58 occurred t h e account of how Nudimmud was sent
against T i a m a t a n d how h e turned back.' I t therefore follows
t h a t t h e t e x t of K. 10,008 must b e put in t h e g a p between
11. (85) a n d (104). O n this assumption t h e greater part of t h e
fragment (at least down t o 1. 1 2 ) carries on t h e speech of
AnSar, which begins at 1. ( 8 5 j I n this speech Angar refers
t o t h e fate of Apsu (K. 10,008, 1. z), a n d t h e subsequent
appointment of Icingu b y T i a m a t t o Icad t h c rebcl forces2

I n view of the fact that in Tahlct 111, 11. 5 3 f. and I I I f. AnSar
refers first to Ann's attempt to oppose Tiamat, and then to that of
Nudimmud, it might legitimately he urged that this represents
the order in which the events took place. And, as Ann's attempt
is described in Tablet 11, 11. (72)-(82)) I was inclined, before
I came across K. 10,008, to put Nudiinmud's attempt in the gap
between 11. (85) and (104). But the order in which AnSar refers
to the setting out of Ann and Nudimmud is not necessarily
chronological. Moreover, as Nudimmud had already overcome
ApsU, and as it was he who brought the news of Tiamat's revolt
to Aniar, it would he only natural that he should he the first to he
sent against h e r ; in support of this view it may be further noted
that Nudimmud's name occurs in I. 58. On the other hand, if it
be insisted that Angar's references in Tablet I11 must be talzen to
imply that Nudimmud's setting out against Tiamat followed that
of Anu, it is necessary to place the account referring to Nudimmud
after the line co,njecturally numbered as (85). And, as the earlier
lines of K. 10,008 do not appear to refer to this episode, it follows
that the gap after I. 58 is less than ten lines and that after I. (85) is
greater than twenty lines ; or else that K.10,008 does not belong
to the series Enunza elif, but contains a variant account of the story
of Creation. On the whole it appears to me preferable to suppose
that the order in which the events are referred to in AnSar's
speech is not to be taken as chronological, but as leading up to
a climax ; he says, " Anu I sent, hut he could not withstand her;
and even Nudimmud was afraid and turned haclt."
With the phrase nzi-lam-mi !.bit in I. 4 may he compared
Tablet I, 11. I 18 and 126, and the parallel passages. T h e apparent
reference to ten in place of eleven monsters is noteworthy.

F R A G M E N T O F CREATION SERIES, TABLET 11.

189

and carry on the war against the gods (1. 7 f.); he the11
describes how he sent Anu and Nudimmud against Tiatnat,
and how they could not withstand her and turned back
(1. 10 f.), and in the following line (I. 12) he either begins
his appeal to Marduk, or, as appears to me more probable,

Fragment of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series (I<. ro,aoX).

states his intention of appealing to Marduli to hecome the
champion of the gods. The fragment may be transliterated
as follows :I.[
2.

.

.

.

[ .

3.[

.

.

.
.

.

.

.

i]S - [ p u ] ~ [ .
. ] Apsu u-[ .

. ]

.

] it-tur-ru-:u

[ .

]
.

.

.

.

.

]

4. [ . . . . ] m i - Zam .m i es"- r i [ t .
.
. ]
5. [ . . . 1-hu(?)-ma-'-ni bum (?)-mu-r[a- . . . 1
6. [ . . . 1-bi up-Sa-na Za sa-hi-pa [ .
. . ]
7 . [ . . . . -%]u '"'Kin-gu Su-US-[ku-u .
. ]
8
.
]-ma Ti-a-ma-t[i .
]
9. [ . . . . . 1 - a k lib-hi-Su i - [ .
.
. ]
10. [as'-pur- ma '"']A nam ul i- l i - ' - [ a ma - bar - Sa]
I I . ["'Nu
dim] mud i - dur - ma i - t[n - ra ar - kiS]
12. [ . . . '"'Mardz~]k abhal iliEni9' [ . . . . . ]
13 [ .
.
. ] zj-ti-@u k[u- . . . . . . ]
14.[ . . . . . ] u - s a - a n - n i [ . . . . . . ]
I$. [ . . . . . . . ]
irpit. [ . . . . . . . I
16.[ . . . . . . . ] bul-li-[ . . . . . . . ]
17. [ . . . . . . . ] m a - Z u - [ . . . . . . . I
IS. [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
With 1.13 we may compare lip-ti-& ku-ru-na in Tablet 111,
I. g, and @-ti-& [ku-ru-nu] in 1. 134; and with u-sa-an-ni
we may compare Tablet 111, 1. 135. These phrases upon
I<. 10,008 may be explained by supposing that AnSar's
appeal to Marduk was accompanied by the mixing and
drinking of wine.
C. T w o FRAGMENTS O F THE FIFTHTABLETOF THE
CREATIONSERIES.-The first eleven lines of the fragment
K. 13,774 correspond (with some interesting variants) to the
text of the Fifth Tablet, 11. 6-16 ; while the last three lines
of the fragment give a variant text to that found in 11. 17-19
upon other copies of the Fifth Tablet. The unimportant
variants may be first noted as follows : in 1. 6 I<. 13,774 gives
the variant ru as the last syllable of "'Ni-6i-ri, and for ana
reads a-na; in 1. 10 it reads u-dun-lzi-na for ud-dan-ni-na ;
in 1. 13 it reads s"uh-nat for Su-uk-nat ; in 1. 14 it reads a g [ f ]
for a-@-[el ; and in 1. 16 it reads a-na for ana. I n 1. 8 it
gives a more interesting variant, reading o''A-~zumin place

-

-

-

FRAGMENT OF CREATION SERIES, TABLET V.

I91

of ""E-a ; that is to say, 1. 8, according to this version, would
read, " H e set the station of BE1 and Anu along with him,"
in place of " H e set the station of BE1 and E a along with
him." For a further discussion of this reading, see the
Introduction.
In 1. 1 2 occurs a still more interesting variant; according
to K. 13,774 the first half of the line runs [ . . . AaklKabai'u 121;-te-pa-a, I' [ . . . . ] his star he caused to shine
forth," in place of "'Nannar-ru ui-te-pa-a, The Moon-god

Creation Series, Tablet V, 11. 6-19 (K. 13,774)

he caused to shine forth." As the beginning and end of the
line are wanting, it would be rash to conjecturally restore
them ; but it may be regarded as certain that the phrase
iuk-nut +nu-&, " a being of the night," in 1. 13 refers to the
Moon-god, and that the lines which follow contain Marduk's
charge to him. I n the course of Marduli's address to the
Moon-god, in 11. 17 and 18, which upon other copies of the
Fifth Tablet contain directions with regard to the 7th and
14th days of the month, K. 13,774 gives the variant readings

Igz

APPENDIX 11.

. . . . .
. . . . .

] IV"" Vzimu [ . . . . . ] and
] KAN V Zimu[ . . . . . 1. T h e
traces of 1. 19 upon K. 13,774do not correspond t o the text
of this line as already known.
K. I 1,641is part of another copy of the Fifth Tablet, and
contains on its obverse parts of 11. 14-22,and 011 its reverse

(17) [
(18) [

[BROKEN SURFACE]

Creation Series, Tablet V, 11.

14-22

(I<. 11,641, Obverse).

parts of lines which may be conjecturally numbered as
1 ( 8 ) - ( I ) The information which the obverse of the
fragment supplies with regard to the text of thc Fifth Tablet

193

F R A G M E N T O F CREATION SERIES, T A B L E T V.

is not very great, and may be noted as follows: the traces
of 11. I4 and 17 upon K. 11,641 give no variants nor restorations ; for I. 1 5 the fragment reads [ . . . . . -$]a-hi e[ , . . . , ]-ti, and proves that the suggested restoration

Creation Series, Tablet V, the last thirteen lines (K. 11,641,Reverse)

[k-nu] is incorrect ; the end of this line should read e - [221
ma-a-ti, which gives the same sense as before. I n 1. 16 the
fragment gives the variant [a]-nufor ana ; in 1. 18 for me?-L[i]
it gives the variant mi-i(?)-[ . .
. ] ; in I. 19 it gives

.

13

traces of the last character but one in the line, which does
not correspond to those given by I<. 3,567 I<. 8,588 ; a t the
end of 1. zo it gives the variant reading [air-Ka-niS, and it is
possible that K. 3,567, etc., read ar-h[a-nu]-us'; in 1. 21 it
confirms the suggested restoration of the sign ma a t the end
of the line ; and in 1. zz it gives slight traces of the last two
characters in the line.
The reverse of K. I 1,641 has already been used on p. 84 f.,
in the transliteration and translation of the end of the Fifth
Tablet. On p. 85, note 3, it is pointed out that the last six
lines contain the complaint of the gods to Marduk in
consequence of which he conceived the plan of creating
mankind. I t may here be noted that of the last line of the
tablet, K. r 1,641 seems to give traces of MES, the plural sign ;

+

A possible fragment of the Creation Series (79-7-8, 47).

this may have been followed by a pronominal suffix, ha, or
may have immediately preceded tbe word ni-i-nu preserved
by the fragment K. 8,526.
D. T w o POSSIBLE FRAGMENTS OF TIIE CREATION
SERIES.-In Cunezyo~~z
Texts, part xiii, pl. 24, the text is
given of a small fragment, K. 1z,ooo6,of which the following
is a transliteration: ( I ) [ . . . . . . ] (2) [
. ]
a-7z[a . . . . . ] (3) [ . . . ] U F ? Z - ~ ~[ Z ~. . . ]
(4) [ . . . . . ] Ti-amat us'-[ . . . . . ] (5) [ . . . ]
in-nu-at-[ . . . . . ] (6) [a]r-nu-US-Szllu[ . . . . . 1
( 7 ) [i-p]zr-Lz~-&
[ . . . . . ] (8) [ . . . . . 1. From the style
of the writing and the mention of Tiamat, it is possible that
the fragment belongs to the Creation Series.
Another possible fragment of the Creation Series is 79-7-8,

.

.

195,

POSSIBLE FRAGMENTS OF CREATION SERIES.

47, t h e t e x t of which is given in t h e block on p. 194 I n
t h e character of t h e clay and t h e style of writing i t closely
resembles K. 11,641,which is a fragment of a copy of t h e
Fifth T a b l e t (see above, pp. 192 &) ; while t h e mention of t h e
gods '"'La-&a-mu in 1. z, A n - ! a ~ in 1. 3 , and ["'Bld in 1. 4
is in favour of its being a fragment of a tablet of t h e series.'

+

Reference may also he made to the fragment R. 982 807-18, 178, of which the first few lines of the obverse are given in
transliteration by Delitzsch, Weltschbpfungsepos, p. I ro f., note I ;
for the text, see Cuneifoorm Texts, part xiii, pl. 31. In the character
of its clay and in its style of writing this fragment resembles
tablets of the Creation Series; cf. also I. z f . of the reverse, ina
hi-rib apsi ib-n[a
. . . . 1,ib-ni-&-ma ""E-a .
. 1.
The fragments of legends, I<. 7,067 and K. 8,572 have been
catalogued by Bezold as possibly belonging to tablets of the
series E-nu-ma E-Zi;, and their texts are therefore given in Cun.
Txts., part xiii, pl. 31 ; the first line preserved by K. 7,067
probably reads "'E-a ina [aplsi [ . .
1, followed by
. .
1, while the
the line ilani*' radliti*' zin-tal-ku-ma [
first line of K . 8 , s . i ~reads [ . . .
. 1-da a-me-Zu lum-;u
i-[ .
.
hut the grounds are slender for assigning
them to the Creation Series. T o this series the minute fragment
I<. 11,048 (see Cun. Txts., part xiii, pl. 31) is assigned (with
a query) by Bezold in the CataZogue, vol. v, p. 2,078, presumably
from the character of the writing, unless K. I 1,048 is a misprint.
T h e fragment K. ~z,oooc (Cun. TxLs., part xiii, pl. 31) is also
assigned by Bezold to the series (see Catalogue, vol. v, p. 2,078).
Its colophon states that it is the First Tahlet of a series styled
E-n[u-ma .
1, hut as the traces of the last four lines
of the text do not correspond to the last four lines of the First
Tablet of the series Enuma el;;, and as the catch-line does not
correspond to the first line of the Second Tablet, it is clear that
K. rz,oooc is a fragment of the First Tahlet of some other series.
K. 10,791 (Cun. Tx.!~., part xiii, pl. 31) is another fragment which
Bezold suggests may belong to the series Enuma elif, presumahly
from the occurrence of the verbs i6-ha-ni in 11. z and j and
ib-6a-nu-u in I. 4. As, however, it belongs to a text which is
arranged in columns and divided into sections, it is clear that it
does not belong to the Creation Series.

.

. .

. I,

. . . .

I ..

.
.

. . .
. .

E. A REFERENCE TO " T H E WATERS T H A T WERE
ABOVE " AND " T H E WATERS THAT WERE BENEATH " T H E
F I R M A M E N T . - T ~ ~ text may here be given of an interesting
fragment, S. 2,013, which has been copied by Bezold
(cf. Jensen in Schrader's KeiZins. Bihl., vi, p. 307) and by
Delitzsch (cf. Handworterbuch, p. xii), but has, I believe, not
yet been published. If it is part (as is hardly probahle) of
the Creation Series, the reference to the upper and the lower
Tiamat in 1. of. shows that it cannot belong to an earlier
tablet than the Fifth; while in general style it appears to
resemble the addresses found on the Seventh Tablet, rather

Fragment referring to the Upper Tiamat and the Lpwer Tiamat (S. 2,013).

than to be in narrative form. I t will be seen, however, from
the accompanying block that the lines are divided in writing
into halves ; this is characteristic of several neo-Babylonian
copies of tablets of the Creation Series, but does not
occur upon any of the Assyrian copies that have yet been
identified. The text of the fragment may be transliterated as
follows :-

THE UPPER AND THE LOWER TIARIAT.

[
2.[
'3.[
4. [
5. [
6. [
7. [
8. [
9. [
10. [
I 1. [
12. [
13. [
I.

.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.
.
.

. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]
. . . ]

.

. ] mbiti[(ti?) . . . . ]
[ .
. ] t u u [ . . . . ]
[ .
a ] g ize Su [ . . . . ]
[ .
] &6/i u ta-ha-[xi . . . ]
[ .
1-tu is-xi-tu [ . . . . ]
[nza]&arbit xi&@urs,arilib-ba-[ . . . ]
nam - ru ;a2 - ba - bu [ . . . . ]
fa SamZ(e) ru-ku-u-ti [ . . . . ]
Sa @4 - bur pa/-&-ti [ . . . . ]
fa inn Ti-amat e-Li-ti [ . . . ]
iua 3i-amat Sa#-Li-ti [ . . . ]
[ . . . ] u-~pi-izisha-l[a-/nu(?). . ]
[ . . . . ] s[a (?)I-&[$ . . . . 1
[

.
.
.
.
.

I97

.
.
.
.
.

F o r a discussion of t h e title &ubuv and of t h e phrases
Ti-amat e-Li-ti and Ti-amat ;a$-&ti, see t h e Introduction.
F. ANSAII A N D T H E HISTORYOF CREATION.-A fragment, which it has been thought m a y perhaps belong t o one
o f t h e later tablets of t h e Creation Series,%is K. 3,445 + R. 396
(cf. Cztz. Tersts, p a r t xiii, pl. 24 f.) 3 ; t h e smaller fragment
K. 14,949 (op. cit., pl. 24) is a duplicate. Lines 1-26 of t h e
obverse contain only traces of t h e beginnings of lines, arnong
-

' Possibly read [nzalhar E-igi-e-nz'r.
Cf. George Smith, Chaldea~z Account of Genes&, pp. 67 ff.,
Bezold, Caialogue, vol. ii, p. 534, and Delitzsch, WeNsch?ipfunfsepos,
pp. 19, 5 1 ff., 87f.. 109f. The text of the reverse of R.j,qq5 was
given by S. A. Smith in Miscellaneous Texfs, pl. ro.
In shape and writing the fragment resembles some of the
tablets of the Creation Series. I t rnay be noted that each tenth
line of the text is indicated in the margin of the tablet by the
Thus, on the Ohv., 11. 2, 1 2 , 2 2 , and 32 are so
figure "to."
marked, and on the Rev., 11. 7, 16, zg, and 35 ; on the Rev.
sometimes two lines of the text are written in one line of the tablet.

198

APPENDIX 11.

which it may be noted that 1. 11 possibly begins with the
name of Marduk. From 1. 27 onwards the obverse reads :
(27) ul-tu u-me u-[ . . . . . ] (28) ma-as-rat mu-s"i u
im-[mi . . . . . ] (29) rn-ju-US-tu Sa Ti-ajmat . . . . . ]
(30) Anin:,, $ - t a - ' [ . . . . . ] (31) i h - ~ u r - m a ana
[ . . . . . ] (32) te-6i Sa-a-ri [ . . . . . ] (33) iu-uh-tur
iwzn-[ . . . . . ] (34) u-ad-di-ma ?[a- . . . . . ]
(35) if-hun @a@kada[ . . . . . ] (36) nu@-6%up-te-it[ . . . . . . ] (37) ip-te-e-ma n[a- . . . . . ] (38) nu-/ii-ri
;a up-[ . . . . . ] (39) iJ-pu-uh n[a- . . . . . ]
(40) nam-6a-'-[ . . . . . 1. The occurrence of the names
of Angar (1. 30) and possibly of Marduk (1. I I), the reference
to "the slaver," or " t h e breadth," of Tiamat (1. 29) and
possibly to her head (1. 35)) and the mention of "springs"
(1. 36t), "deeps" (1.40)~and monsters of the deep ("dolphins?")
in 1. 38, would not be inconsistent with the fragment forming
part of the Fifth Tablet of the Creation Series.
The reverse of the fragment reads as follows:-(I) [ . . . . . ]
(2) ha-s'ur-ru [ . . . . . ] (3) [ . . . . . 1-hi-ik-ma [ . . . . . ]
(4) [ . . . . . ]-me Jar-[ . . . . . ] (5) [ . . . . . ]
"'Adad [ . . . . . ] ( 6 ) 2s"-Run eLi [ . . . ] (7) ui-bar ?zd-?7ze
[ . . . . . ] (8) ul-tu me-lanz-me [ . . . . . ]
(9) a-za-mzl-Su apsG ra-?u6-[bu . . .
. ] ' (10) 2 i7~a
e-ma-& US-Sa[K- . . . . . ] (11) ina si-ma-ah-hi-&
[ . . . . . ] (12) ilani*' ma-La 6a-Su-[u . . . . . ]
(13) *'Lab-mu u 3
. . . . . ] (14) i-pu-&-ma
pa (?)-[ . . . . . ] ( I 5) pa-na-a-ma An-far [ . . . . . ]
(16) i '*'Sin ?a[+ . . . . . ] (17) fa-nu-u it-zah-ru
[ . . . . . 1 (18)
. . . . . ] (19) e-nu-ma a-na

.

.

.

' The sign followii~g.fa is not ni, so that the reading i6-fa-ni is
impossible.
a The duplicate K. 14,949 gives a variant reading for this line:
iu-[
. . . 1.
Omitted by K. 14,949.
' The traces of the first sign of the name upon K. 14,949suggest
La, i.e. '"'L[a-&a-mu].

.

.

ANSHAR A N D TI-IE CREATION.

] ( 2 0 ) pi(?)-ha ma-ah-turn hi-[ . . . . . ]
ul-tu u-me at-ta [ . . . . . ] ( 2 2 ) ?nim-?nu-uat-ta
ta-had-bu [ . . . . . ] (23) An-Sar pa-a-fu epur"(us3-?%a
i-kab-bi : a-na ""[ . . . . . ] (24) e-li-nu ap-si-i Su-bat
[ . . , , . ] ( 2 5 ) mi-d-rit E-Sar-f,a fa ad-nu-u a-lza-hu :
[ . . . . . ] (26) Sap-lis*a;-ra-ta u-dan-ni-n[a . . . . ]
(27) lu-pu us'-ma bita ZZL zu-bat [ . . . . . ] (28) hir-6uUS-Su rna-&a-za-<uiuu-far-Sia-ma : [ . . . . . ] (29) e-nu-7na
nl-tzl apsi i-be-[ . . . . . ] ( 3 0 ) aS-rzr [ . . . . . ]
nu-bat-ta [ . . , . . 1 (31) e-[ . . . . . ]-pat jilli
[ . . . . . ] (32) af-r[u . . . . . n]u-bat-ta hun[ . . . . . ].hu-an [ . . . . . ] (33) k [ ~ -. . . . ]-hi
bit& ilani*' rabnli'L [ . . . . . ] ni-zp-pu-[ . . . . . ]
(34) [ . . . . . ] abu-fu an-~za-a[ . . . . . 1-a-fu
[ . . . . . 1 ( 3 5 ) 'A' [ . . . . . ] - lu - ha - nza : eli
nzi7/tma fa ib-na-a &-a-ta-a-ha [ . . . . . ] (36) ~nalz-[nu
. . . ]-ha i-Si: eli kak-ka-rz~Sn ib-nu-a ha-ta-a-[ha . . . . 1
(37)maiz-[nu . . . . . ]-ha i-s"i : "'"ASr"urK' fa tag-ku-m
mu(?)-[ . , , . , ] (38) a;-[ . . . . . 1-ta-7zi i-dL
da-ri-Sa71z [ , , , , . ] (39) [ . . . . . 1-luh-ha-xi
22-bil-Zu-ni [ . . . . . ] (40) ~ [ i - . , . . . 1-ni : mann-nza +-ri-ni &z-ni ( 4 1 )U S - ~ [u . . . . . ]-~za-ahz~r[ . . . . . ] (42) i/i-du-[ . . . . . ] (43) i / Z n i i
iu-[ . . . . . ] (44) Sa i-du [ . . . . . ] (45) ip-te-e[ . . . . . I .
The mention of Labmu in 1. 13 of the reverse may also be
cited in favour of the fragment belonging to the Creation
Series, while the references to Adad (I. 5) and to the city of
A%ur (1. 37) are not necessarily inconsistent with this view.
Lines 23 if.,however, can scarcely be reconciled with the end
of the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series. These lines
read : " (23) An& opened his mouth and spake, and unto
the god [ . . . . he addressed the word] : (24) ' Above
the Deep, the dwelling of [ . . . . 1, ( 2 5 ) opposite E-5ara
which 1 have created, [ . . . . ] (26) I have strengthened
the regions in the depth [ . . . . ] (27) I will build
a house that it may be a dwelling for [ . . . . ] (28) In
[

. . . . .

199

(21)

the midst thereof will I found his district (lit. city, cf. Tabl. IV,
1. 146)and [ . . . .
In this speech Anzar, and not
Marduk, appears as the god of creation, which is scarcely in
harmony with the general tenour of the Creation Series.
Moreover, in I. 2 5 An4ar definitely states that he created
E-Sara, whereas in Tablet IV, 11. 144-IA~,
it is related that
Marduk, and not Angar, created E-Sara. Until more of the
text of the Fifth and Sixth Tablets is recovered, it would be
rash to assert that the fragment cannot belong to the Creation
Series ; meanwhile, in view of the itlconsistencies noted, it is
preferable to assume that it does not form part of that work,
but is a fragment of a closely parallel version of the story in
which An4ar plays a more prominent part.
G. THE RIVER OF CREATION.-On p. 128 f. a transliteration and translation are given of an address to a mystical

I."'

Fragment of an incanlalion-tablet containing an arldress to the River 01 Creation
(82-9-18,5,311, Obverse).

river of creation, which forms the opening lines of incantations
upon the reverse of S. 1,704and the obverse of 82-g-18,531
I.
As the text of these fragments has not been previously
published, the obverse of the one and the reverse of the
other are given in the accompanying blocks. It will be
noted that 11. 1-8 of 82-9-18,5,311 correspolld to 11. 1-7 of

T H E RIVER O F CREATION.

201

--

S. 1 , 7 0 4 . The eighth line of S. 1,704, which concludes the
direct address, or invocation, to the river, is omitted by
82-9-18, 5,311, and from this point onward .it would seem
that the tablets cease to be duplicates. The insertion of the
cominon formula, given in the ninth line of 82-9-18, 5,311,
would not by itself prove this, but what remains of the tenth
line of 82-9-18, 5,311 does not correspond to the ninth line

Fragment of an incaiitation-tablet cotitnini>lgim address to the Ilivrr of Creation
(S. 1,704, lleversr).

of S. 1,704, We are justified, therefore, in treating the address
to the river as an independent fragment, which has been
employed as the introduction to two different incantations.
H. THE SUPPOSED INSTRUCTIONS T O MAN A F T E R IIIS
CREATION.-The tablet K. 3.364 (CUIZ.
T x ~ spt.
. , xiii, pl. 29f.)
was thought by George Smith to contain the instructions
given to the first man and wornan after their creation. 111

202

API'ENDIX 11.

The ChaLdedenn Account of Genesis, p. 80, he says, " T h e obverse '
of this tablet is a fragment of the address from the deity to
the newly created man on his duties to his god" ; and a little
later on he adds, " T h e reverse of the tablet appears, so far
as the sense can be ascertained, to be addressed to the
woman, the companion of the man, iilforining her of her
duties towards her partner." In his BabyLor2iscJie WeZsc/li;pfungsepos, pp. 19f., 5 4 f , 88 f., and I I I f., Delitzsch also treats
the tablet as forming part of the Creation Series.? The
recovered portion of the Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series,
however, and the Neo-Babylonian duplicate of K. 3,364, the
text of which is published in vol. ii, pls. Ixiv-lxvi (No. 3335 I ) ,
together disprove the suggested connection of K. 3,364 with
the Creation Series. The reasons on which this collclusion
is based may be briefly stated as follows :-(I) The recovered
portion of the Sixth Tablet indicates that the description of
the creation of man there given was very similar to the
account furnished by Berossus; and it follows that the greater
part of the text must have been in the form of narrative.
If Marduk gave man any instructions after his creation, these
can have occupied only a small part of the tablet. Rut
both the obverse and reverse of I<. 3,364 contain moral
precepts, and the same is the case with colutnns ii and iii
of the new duplicate No. 33,851.~ For such a long serles of
moral instructions there is no room upon the Sixth Tablet
of the Creation Series. ( 2 ) Col. ii of No. 33,851 refers to
certain acts which are good, and to others which are not good,

' The side of the tablet which George Smith refers to as the
obverse is really the reverse: this is rendered certain by the
duplicate No. 3 3 , 8 5 1 .
In my Babylonian R e l w n and Mythology, p. 2 f . I also
provisionally adopted this view.
In col. i of this tablet only the ends of lines are preserved, and
in col. iv a part of the colophon.

TkfE "DUTIES OF MAN."

z03

in the eyes ef SamaS.' This is quite consistent with the
character of Sama4 as the judge of heaven and earth, but he
does not appear in this character in the Creation Series,
where he is referred to merely as the sun which Marduk
created and set upon his course. (3) In the duplicate, No.
33,851, the text is arranged in columns, two on each side of
the tablet. This fact in itself is sufficient to prove that the
composition has nothing to do with the series Enuvza eLil
The text upon tablets of the Creation Series is never arranged
in columns, but each line is written across the tablet from
edge to edge. This characteristic applies not only to the
copies of the Creation Series from Kuyunjik, but also to the
Babylonian copies of all periods, and even to the rough
" practice - tablets " on which students wrote out extracts
from the poem.
The text inscribed upon K. 3,364 and No. 33,851 is, in fact,
a long didactic composition containing a number of moral
precepts, and has nothing to do with the Creation Series.%
The composition in itself is of considerable interest, however,
for enough of it remains to show that it indicates a high
standard of morality.

' Cf. I. 9, ul !a-a-6i eli ' " S a m a ~ i-[ . . . . . 1; and I. r j,
ta-a-6ieli"'Samadi-[ . . . .
1. T h e s i g n s ~ ~ - u ~ i n t h e s e
passages are clearly to be rendered "" Sama;, and not du-tu,
"godhead," in the sense in which ilu-u-ti occurs in I<. 3,364,
Rev., I. 14.
a It may he noted that the phrase a-kil kar-si (K. 3,364, Rev.,
1. 5 , and No. 33,851, col. iii, I. 4), which has been thought by some

.

to be the title of a power of evil termed "the Calumniator"
(cf. Bezold, Catalogue, vol. ii, p. 526). is not a proper name or
title, but should be rendered simply as " a slanderer!'

204

APPENDIX 111.

a n riome traces of f4e sirifor,! of Crcafion in
@efigioue anb @sfrofogicaf l&itercture.
THEREis abundant evidence to prove that under the late
Assyrian kings, and during the Neo-Babylonian and Persian
periods, the history of the Creation as told upon the Seven
Tablets of the series Enutnn elif was widely read and studied,
and there can he no doubt that it exercised a considerable
influence on the religious literature which continued to gather
around Marduk's name. In the fragmentary hymns and
prayers which have come down to us, however, it is difficult
to determine how far the priestly and popular conceptions
of Marduk were influenced by the actual story of the Creation
as we know it, and to what extent they were moulded by
earlier legends and beliefs, and by Marduk's own position as
the native god of Babylon. That actual phrases from the
Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series were made use of in
other similar compositions is sufficiently proved by the
fragments published at the end of Appendix I ; and in view
of this fact we may perhaps hear echoes from the earlier
tablets of the series in some of the phrases and attributes
applied to Marduk in the contemporary religious texts. It
would be impossible within the limits of the present work
to attempt an exhaustive treatment of this subject, but, as
a striking instance of such allusions to the Creation story,
reference may here be made to the fragment K. 3,35 I , which,
I believe, has not hitherto been translated?

' A rather rough copy of this tablet is included in Craig's
Religious Texts, pl. 43. As several signs, including 1. 4, are
there omitted, and others are incorrectly copied, the text of the
obverse is given in the block on p. 205.

I N F L U E N C E OF CREATION LEGEPZDS.

20s

The upper part of the tablet is broken and rubbed, but the
greater part of the text is well preserved and clearly written,
and may be transliterated as follows :-

[ . . . el-til-lum mriv 'I" E-a [ . . . . ] ~nzut-taZ-lum
z. [ , . . ] h[i;-Sat] SamZ(e) u iv;zti(ti) m[u]-SimSi-ma-a-ti
3. [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ] b i - n u - t u
I.

-Part of a Hymn to Mardok (K. 3,351).

206

A P P E N D I X 111.

8. [{]a a

- na

9.a-na

u-ta-az-zu-mi-&

10. a -

na

11.a-na
12.

I

- kip

Sanzz~(u) i -

Kahki - Su

te-bi-Su

iz-zi

-

3. i na b ? -~ ru - m i eLciti"
E-kur

5. i - na

i

bit

-

7

-

-

nl

ilznip'

YU

ib-Si
rabliti"

- iu

Sa-ku-ZL par-su u-iu

i - nam - 611 - {u

16. i - n a nab-li-Su u - t a b - b a - t u s'adzni"

17. fa

i - tzw -

fa - ru - u5 ta - lu - uk

tak-na-a-ti

-L

a$-sw-u

iltiniJ2

a

- ub - bu

YU

id-dal-la-&

be-luwz ra-US-6u ?a ina pn-&ur
fin-na-as-su La ib-ba-s'u-u

14. i-na
I

zi

ta - ,'ta - z i - Su

kahhc'" - :u
91tar-su-ti

turn-tii% g a l - l a - t i i - s a - a n z - 6 u - ' rn-u#-p~i-Sa

18. apiL
19. ul-tu

E-Say-ra

k

a-sur-mk-ka

be-lum

kar-rad
i

n

iiani*'

ni-bit-su

s'u-ut

da-ad-me

i-na pa-an '
a ia-zi-ti im-nte-du Sa-n~a-mi
z 1. Sa AB - MAG sal - lu turn &a - mu - u u i a - ru
22. [ , , . . , . . ] ;[a] ka[li]-Sn-nu "'A-nun-nu-ki
23. [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I "'lgigi
z4.[ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ]

20.

-

T h e fragment contains the opening lines of a hymn to
Mardnk,' of which the following is a translation :-

I . 0 lord [
2. [Who .

. . . . 1, son of

E a , the exalted [

. . . . 1,

. , . ] the [hosts] of heaven and earth, who
ordaineth destinies !

The composition is addressed to Marduk, who is named in
1. 7 and is referred to in the three preceding lines under his titles
Tutu, Sagzu, and BBI; moreover, in I. I he is termed the "son
of Ea." The Reverse of the tablet contains the last five lines of
ASur-bani-pal's common colophon.

I N F L U E N C E O F CREATION LEGENUS.

207

. . . . . . .

the .
. ] offspring,
. . . . . . . the . . . . offlspring is T u t u !
5 . [ . . . . 1, the great queen, the consort of Sagzu !
6. 0 lord Bel, thou prince, who art mighty in understanding!
7. [The . . . . ] of war and battle is in the hand of
Marduk, the director of the gods,
8. A t whose battle heaven quaked,
g. A t whose wrath the Deep is troubled !
10. A t the point of his weapon the gods turned back !
I I. T o his furious attack there was no opponent !
12. 0 mighty lord, to whom there is no rival in the assembly
of the great gods !
1 3 In the bright firmament of' heaven his course is supreme !
14. In E-kur, the temple of true worship, exalted is his
decree !
15. With the evil wind his weapons blaze forth,
16. With his flame steep mountains are destroyed !
17. H e overwhelmeth the expanse of the billowing ocean !
18. The Son of E-gara is his name, the Hero of the gods is
his title !
19. From the depth1 is he lord of the gods of human
habitations !
20. Before his terrible bow the heavens stand fast !
zr. . . . plague and destruction, and tempest,
22. [ . . . . . . . . ] of all the Aunnaki,
23. [ . . . . . . . ] t h e Igigi!
24. [ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
3. [
4. [

'

In this phrase we may probably see an antithesis to "the
heavens" in the following line: for other passages in which the
word asurrakku occurs, cf. Delitzsch, Handw?irteer6uch, p. I r 1 , and
Muss-Arnolt, Concise Dicf.,p, I z I .

208

APPENDIX .II

I t will be noticed that in 11. 8-11 the hymn describes the
quaking of the heavens a t Marduk's battle, the trouble of the
Deep a t his wrath, and the flight of the gods from the point
of his weapon. W e have hcre an unmistakable reference to
the battle of Marduk with Tiamat, and the subsequent flight
of the gods, her helpers. The reference in 1. rz to Marduk's
supremacy in the assembly of the gods does not necessarily
refer to the Seventh Tablet of the Creation Series, but the
itnhulZa, or "evil wind," in I. 15, and Marduk's "flame" in I. 16
are clearly reminiscences of the Fourth Tablet, 11. 45 and 96,
and 1. 4 0 ; and in " t h e billowing ocean (tam-iinz)" in 1. 17
we may possibly see a reference to Tiamat. Finally, the
mention of Marduk's bow in 1. 2 0 may be compared with the
Fourth Tablet, 1. 35, and with the fragment of the Fifth
Tablet which describes the translation of the bow to heaven
as the Bow-star (see above, p. 82 f.).
Such references to the Creation story are of considerable
interest, but they do not add anything to the facts concerning
Marduk's character which may be gathered from the Creation
Series itselt An additional interest, however, attaches to
some astrological' fragments which I have come across, inasmuch as they show that a t a late period of Babylonian
history the story of the fight between Mardulc and Tiamat
had received a very definite astrological interpretation. One
of the fragments exhibits Tiamat as a star or constellation
in the neighhourhood of the ecliptic, and, moreover, furnishes
an additibnal proof of a fact which has long been generally
recognized, viz., the identification of the monster-brood of
Tiamat with at any rate some of the signs of the Zodiak.
The most important of the astrological fragments above
referred to is made up of three pieces, Nos. 55,466, 55,486,
and 55,627, which I have rejoined, and its text is published
in vol. ii, pls. Ixvii-lxxii. I t measures 5$ in. by 3; in., and is
part of a large tablet which was inscribed with two, or
possibly three, broad columns of writing on each side. The
fragment of the tablet recovered gives considerable portions
of the first and last columns of the text, as well as traces of

the second column on the obverse and of the last column but
one on the reverse. The colophon, which possibly contained
the date a t which the tablet was inscribed, has not been
preserved, but from the character of the writing and the
shape of the tablet it may be concluded that it does not
belong to an earlier period than that of the Arsacidzc ;
i t may possibly be assigned to as late a date as the first
century B.C.
From the first section which has been preserved of col. i
it is clear that the text is closely connected with the story
of the Creation. This will be apparent from the following
transliteration and translation of the portiolis of 11. 1-7 which
have been preserved : ( I ) [ . . . . . ]-nu Sa !ciFt?"-f!iil
rnz~L-muLis-si-ma [ . . . . . ] (2) [ . . . . . "'Z<i7~]-g7~

&a-mi-ri-Su ina kakhi La ga-6a-al i[t]- ta-his-n[m]-??~[a]
( 3 ) [ . . . . . ] Ti-amat 2%-mu-n iL-&-u s'ilrvu-us-su
(4) [ . . . . duplif7nliti" Sa ""ZCi7z-gu it-7iz1l-hufia-fu-z~/-Sn
(5) [ . . .
. ]-nu id-ni-ma biib ap-si-i u-/a-a;-hit
(6) [ .
. . . ]-?nu alza La ?%a-Si-ezip-fe-e-ti Ti-anzat
(7) [
. . . . ] u-hal-Lanz ab-6i-e-fu, " ( I ) [ . . . . . ]
whose hands removcd the Spear, and [ . . . . . ]
(2) [ . . . . . Kinlgu, her spouse,.~vitha weapon not
of war was cut off, and (3) [ . . . . . ] Tiamat he
conquered, he took her sovereignty. (4) [ . . . . . ]

.

.

.

.

the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu he took in his hand.
(5) [ . . . . . ] he created, and a t the Gate of the Deep
he stationed. (6) [ . . . . . ] that the deeds of Tiamnt
should not be forgotten (7) [ . . . . . ] he causeth his
fathers to behold."
I n the first line we may probably see a reference to Marduk's
drawing forth of the mult~zuLlz~,
or spear,' which we know from
It is possible that mtrZ-mul is here, not Rl;irduk's actual \vealion,
but Mul-mul, the Spear-star of hlaidulr ; and the verb fi-si-nin lnay
have the intransitive meaning, "disappeared." In vie\\, of the fact
that the following lines refer to episodes in i h c Creation story,
I think the rendering suggested above is preferable.
14

A1'l'ENT)TX

210

ill.

-

~~

~-

Tablet IV of the Creation Series, I. ~ o rhe
, plunged into the
belly of Tiamat, after he had filled her with the evil wind.
Line z may be explained as referring to Mardulc's conquest
of Icingu after Tiamat's death, without further fighting,
though it is possible that it has some connection with the
obscure expression in Tablet IV, I. 120. I n 1. 3 thc text
returns to Marduk's defeat of T i a m a t ; and with the capture
of the Tablets of Destiny from Icing", referred to in 1. 4, we
may compare Tablet IV, I. r z r f. L.itie 5 possibly refers to
an episode in the Creation which may have been recorded
in the missing portion of Tablet V of the Creation Series.
With it we may compare the fixing of a bolt by Marduk
and the stationing of a watchman, in order to keep thc
waters above the firmament in their placc (cf. Tablet IV,
11.137if.); it is possiblc that a similar guardian was stationed
by Marduk in order to restrain the waters of the Deep. Line
6 f. apparently refer to the il~structionsgiven by Marduk to
the gods, "his fathers," in order " t h a t the deeds of Tiamat
(i.e. her revolt and subsequent conquest by himself) should
not be forgotten."
I t is possible that the instructions which
Mardulz is here represented as giving to the gods refer to
their positions in heaven and to the heavenly bodies associated
with them. If this interpretation is correct, it follows that
the later Babylonians, at any. rate, looked upon the astrological
aspect of the Creation story as in accordance with definite
instructions given by Marduk himself. While they believed
that Marduk actually slew Tiamat and subsequently created
the universe as narrated it1 the tablets of the Creation Series,
they held that the associati011 of the principal actors in the
story with some of the more important stars and constellations
was also Marduk's work, his object being to ensure that the
history of the creation of the world should always be kept in
remembrance.
The first section which is prcservcd of the text, referring
-

~

' This

. ~~

~~~

~

--

rendering appcars prcferahle to ltlc possible rending,
la 6n-ii-e, i.c. "that the deeds of 'I'iamat sho~ildbe no more."

T H E CREATION LEGENDS A N D

ASTROLOGY.

21 I

as it does to some of the most striking episodes recorded i11
the Creation Series, appears to be of the nature of an
introduction to what follows. The second sectioil reads :
(8) [ . . . . . "'Mai,du]k(?) u-hal-La-~izupnr-~i-Szr-[nu]
( 9 ) [ . . . . . I - t i m E-la-?nu-u sh [ . . . . . I
a-;ah-[ku] ( t o ) [ . . . . , ] Ti-amat itba-a71z-~?za
[ . . . . . ]
?zi[772
. . . . . ] ( 1 1 ) [ , . T]i-ai~zatinaLib-bii"'Si~z
i7z-n[a11z(?)- . . . . . ] ( 1 2 ) [ . . ] '"Marn'u/z inn Lib-bi
'h'Tam-tzl~z[ . . . . . ] ( 1 3 ) hi-i fa vu-bu-u '"'Marduk
a~zafa-han a-~[zL-bu. , . . . ] (14) i-nn ri-&is si-pit-ti
u me-Lul-ti-& i-kab-[ . . . . . ] ( 1 5 ) e-Zzs" u S@-lii Liml~t-tu7n u-fa-tar-~iza' i-hap-pu-dzr szrr-ra-[a-turn] ( 1 6 ) inn
u-mu Su-u aga taf-i-ri-i&-tumSa nu-uh-hu-ri Sup-pad zr-ha/Z [ i - . . . ] (17) ana mzrh-hi #am; e-nu-turn s"u la si-nzaa - turn i -s'ak - han pa - xi(?) - [s'u] ( I 8 ) iLalzi*' 7na - ba - zi
""'"
AhKadiXf """"'nifd P'-fu-liu zl-!a&-ha-su ul nl-La-a-tunz
(19) a-17zat su-us'-turn(?)i-di6-bu-6% i-4ab-bu-u mn-crg-ri-tu7iz
(20) mi-iZ-hi La tuS-fir (?) 27%-tal-l'iR i-te-z$-s'u sz~r-ra-a-t7~11r
(21) h
a ag-ma '"'Bd u-/iaZ-Lab e;-vi-e-tam ( 2 2 ) E-la-17zn-a
ti-e-rnz~ i-~ah-ha7z-rua i-sap-pan ma-a-ium (23) ana I.r ~ r - u ~ ~ z
$a-ha12 a-bu-6% ana fz~z-muI Z - D I M - M U ep24<uf) NAM-BUL-Dr.
In this section Marduk and Tiamat appear in their astrological characters, Marduk probably as Jupiter, and Tiamat
as a constellation in the neighbourhood of the ecliptic. The
approach of Tiamat and the Moon and of Marduk (i.e. Jupiter)
and Tiamat would seem from 11. 13 ff. to portend the sending
of an abubu, or d e l ~ g e upon
, ~ the earth, followed by rebellion
and tumult among gods and men. If unchecked, the rvrath
of Bel (i.e. Marduk) would result in the destruction of the
temples and in the ruin of the land. T o prevent the sending
of a deluge and to change the omen to one of prosperity,
The sign is Mn, not 12.
ul ul-la-a-[um,as parallel Lo mn-ng-~,i-/z~a
(cf. 1. ~ g ) see
,
Jcnsen, I~osmologie,p. I 2 I f.
o;, possibly, a thundetbolt.

' For

t h e t e x t enjoins t h e performance of certain NAM-13~1.-I(I
prayers.'
T h e third a n d last section of t h e first column reads :
(24) ina " ' ~ * " D ~fa
z u~zi-pi-s"' fa sa-knp
~znkiriinn Dri6iLix'
i-pu-us" ( 2 5 ) iiza Lib-6i ?a *"' M~uftabarvG-nzntanu '"'Silz bpL?*'
ni-sic-ium i a """ELa71ztu'X (26) NUM-LU *' "" SAG-\i l LIGAR
u ""Sanzns' bel2*' ni-sir-rum Sn '""L"Ahkadfix' ( 2 7 ) SU-[ . . 1LU *' idati [*'I fa nu -uk - k7~- ri pali L'n6iLix' ' - Z Lkal- lzm-'
(28) N A M - H U L - B
irza
I aii i-te-flu-us"I<I ni-sir-tunz fa "'Si7z
(29) T E SU-GIu MuL-vzi~lTE & ~ ~ a l i z t u(30)
~ ' I<I 7zi-;ir-tunz
fa majallza;*dhZhLU-ICU-MAL""[
. . . . . 1 (31)1<1ni-

sir-t?~?n
fa Ca"'Mzritabarrzi-?~zilta~zu
*"""'" [ . . . . . ] (32) " 1
ni-~ir-tumfa "' SAG-ME-CAR
"*"*" [ . . . . . ] ( 3 3 ) ilzn
""b" Tap - p a t - turn ina /car - nu - te d i - [ . . . . . ]
(34) [ . . .
. 1-ba-ha-anpa~a.:e-nu-turn [ . . . . . ]
(35) [ . . . . . ] wmk-ki Sip (?)-tz~m
[ . . . . . 1.
T h i s section is concerned with t h e positious of t h e planets
M~~ila6arrzi-?nzita7zu
(Mercury) and SAG-h:~-GAR
(Jupiter) and
of t h e moon a n d sun, a n d of t h e stars Su-GI and MZLL?IZILL;
and it would seem t h a t a change in t h e dynasty ruling a t
Babylon was portended b y t h e rclative positions of Mercury
a n d Jupiter. T o t h a t e x t e n t this section resembles t h e one
t h a t precedes it, b u t there is little apparent connection
between this portion of t h e t e x t a n d t h e Creation Series.
It is possible, however, t h a t this section was continued in
col. ii, a n d t h a t t h e missing portion h a d some co~lnectionwith
t h e legend?

.

This may be the title of a special class of incantations (cf. my
Ma,+ and Sorcery, p. 12r3), or the expression may possibly be
employed, as in some other passages, to indicate generally a class
of incantations, or ceremonies, intcnded to avert the erects or an
evil omen (cf. Thompson, Reports of Masicians and Aslrologers,
p. xlvii f.).
C f Eppin5 and Strassmaier, Z.A., vii, p. zzr f.
Vossihly nsar.
' Of col. ii only traces of the beginnings of a fern lines are
preserved from the lower half of the column: thcy read: ( I ) n-

[

.

.

. .

.

] ( 2 ) Ru-[ .

. . . .

] (3)

IT[I

.

. . .

. ]

T I I E CREATION LEGENDS AND ASTROLOGY.

213

T h e greater part of t h e reverse of t h e fragment is inscribed
with t h e upper half of t h e last column, which in somc respects
is t h e most interesting portion of t h e text. T h e lines t h a t
have been preserved read as follows : ( I ) ina "'6'' Taj-pat-tunz
Sa ni-pi-s'u an-nu-tu [ . , . . . ] ( 2 ) aiza muh-bi '"'MariiuR
iIIi/zu(Ku) ilza hap-kar '"b2'[ . . . . . ] ( 3 ) u '"'lii?z-p
s'u-u : a&-6i : "'U"AB : ah-[ . . . . . ] ( 4 ) TE HIR' Ti-a~izat
pu-uh-ri ana &aZ-turnhi-i [ . . . . . ] ( 5 ) epu!(uf) Ti-amat
n "' Kin-g-i ana if-ten itz2rzlP-ma [ . . . . . ] ( 6 ) a-&I-me;
in-nam-mar-ru-' a<-s'u an-ni-i T E Eusu !a IliI T E A/ir.n6u
PAD [ . . . . . ] ( 7 ) E:zi-rfa : T E Enzir : *"*"'"' U/l-.zu
fi~w,:S~r par-ji Sa Ti-anzat (8) RuZ-/u ,"i-iz-sir-ni-/UI u $ Z L - Z L ~ :a-ui-turn Sa it-ti dib-bi T E ~ '~ ( u ()9 ) a m niu/lhi """'""'E~zzu
u TE MULU- BAD^ zna Zz6-bi TE H I R ~ ~ - lY-anznt
8 1
zc '"'Iiiizyri
(10) Su-nu : gi-iz-za-fzi-tu : /E-i-iz-zn-ui-tilSIL?IZ-!IL aiza lizic/t-hi
TE BIR Ri-iz-zu ( I I ) pu-u!-!a-ni-turn $u-u-za-izi-t?~iizturi~-!'
aiza iuub-bi T E IliA ka-6i ( 1 2 ) T E l i A : 1.E NIULU-BAD Ti-aliznl
tu-ra-ah-tum !zrvz-{~z fairu pa-nu-& z i k m u si7zizi;tzz &r-u
( 1 3 )ina ii6-bi hi-i i-hat &I T E A(zra6u it-ti '"'NNill-Iid u "'"IViizki-gal ( 1 4 )6a!G(u) ziza mu/z-bi j a r - f a fa Ti-amnt ni-ha.' Gud
u Akra6ir I?-ten Szz-n ( I S ) GIR : zu-ha-hi-pu : GIR I z L - :~
I1 . . . -pi af-Su ail-ni-i iira ."a'' 7;@-$at-tirliz (16) I<I n-!ah-ku
TE Enzu iua 1li1 TE MULU-RAII
iiza ngi insv-ri-z/l-tz~i/r
ilIi;l.u(k~.~)
(17) [ . . . . . 1-da TE U,I'U-ICA-GHB-A
i l ~ aIib.bi te

...
.

.

[
. . ] (5) aZz1 [ . . . . 1 ( 6 ) ;a [ . . . . . ]
(7) TB[ . . . . . 1 ( 8 ) *nia"a" [ . . . . . ] (9) rali[ . .
. . ] ( t o ) ul [ . . . . . j. Similarly, only
traces remain of the first collimn preserved upon tile reverse of
the tablet, which read: ( I ) [ . . . . . 1 ( 2 ) '"'Na-na-[a
. . . . . ] ( 3 ) .Fa bu-la-[ . . . . . ] (4) hi-rza-[a- . . . . . ]
(5, beginning a new scctiou) inn "'by
. . . . . j (6) ku[ . . . . . ] (7) pllu .
. . . 1:
1.e. Caper. The sign was read by Strassmaier and Epping as
;AH, $a&u (set: Aslron. nus Bab., App., p. 7 ) , but Jensen lias shown
that it is not S A I ~ but
,
the sign Ur. No. 2,024 (sce Kosii~oiugie,
p. 3r3), which perhaps has the value R I R . As the tenth sign of
the Zodiac it should possibly be rcad as LaZzi.
Explained as pa-far aSakk1' (ID-FA) in VR., pl. 46, No. I ,
Oh"., 1. 28.
(4)

.

214

AI'PENDIX

.

-

111.
-. -

-

UIR ICI ni-sir-tum Sa "'""Ela77ztu ["I (18) [ . . . . . 1-fz~-nu
u-tir-ru-nim-ma ana ~al-trim iz-zi-ail-u '"'Sa7uaS iiza li6-6i
[ . . . . . ] ( 1 9 ) [ . . . . . ] fa
SAG-ME-GAR
ni-me-du T E K A K - S I - DuI TE PAN inn pa-ni *,'**""' [ . . . . . 1
( 2 0 ) [ , . . . . ] ta-ha-zi hi-vza iz-zi-zu ri-[ . . . . . ]
( 2 1 ) [ . . . . . ] m i b a [ . . . . . ] ( z z ) [ .. . . . ]
"".$a~tza<
[ ~ ~ I L ' I'"'Nin-ib
L
Sum-Su ana . . , [ . . . . . ]
(23) [ . . . . . 1-pu-Su "'*'"TAB i-sak-ki-pu I G I MAW
'h'Nziz - i[6 . . . . . ] (24) [ . . . . . ] Kak- ku
Su-u huh k z ~ a - bu - 6u '"' Mafduh ina siliiii - Su k[a - hi]
( 2 5 ) [ . . . . . PIAN' a-bn-6u hak-kn-iu ra66(a) a<-{%
Sa "'Nin-ib a-si a?-Sn an-ni-i [ . . . . . ] (26) [ . . . . . ]
i-kab-~IL-u
1t1 S I R N A M LUL {a il711uXVIIX"" inn ]<I SIG
[ . . . . . ] (27) [ . , . . . ] "" Brl 8ar-m-dn Sa
irza af-gu lib-bi-iu a-Sah-hn [ . . . . . ] (28) [ . . . . . 1-yi.S~~
i-si-&u tr~-kz!-un-t~rnz
"'Win-[ . . . . , ] (29) [ . . . . . 1-tuzlnz
inn id-Sn [[i-ZuZ(-)in(?)E-hr,r [ . . . . . ] ( 3 0 ) [ . . . . . 1?iza-S~~
[ . , . . . 1-an-ua kz [ . . . , . ] (31) [ . . . . . 1-ir
i.a[
. . . . . ]z;TC[, . . , . ]u[ . . . . . I
(32)[. . . . . 1(33)[. . . . .
I t will be noticed that this portion of the text is in the
main explanatory. Unlike col. i, these lines of the text do
not run on in the form of connected sentences, but are broken
up into a number of equations and explanations of terms and
titles ; thus, some terms are explaitled by a play upon words
(cf. 11. 3 and of), while in other places the reason is given for
certain titles (cf. 11. 6 and 7) or additional names (cf. 1. 12).
With regard to the connection of passages it1 this column
with the Creation Series, it may be noted that Kingu, in
addition to Marduk and Tiamat, is introduced. IIc is herc
associated in an astrological sense with Tiamat, and their
alliance in opposition to Marduk is clearly referrcd to in
11. 4-6. Moreover, the fact that Caper and Scorpio are
mentioned in close connection with this passage shows that

-

I.

~

-

--

I Either tile
Bow-star,
Marduli's bovr.

--

or, possibly,

[I% - ll],\N,

i . ~ .'ii'kiz;f~z,

T I I E CREATION LEGENDS A N D ASTROLOGY.

2 15

they here occur, not only in their astronomical sense as
constellations of the Zodiac, but also in their mythical
character as monsters in the host of Tiamat. The rcfcrence
to Marduk's "mighty weapon" in 1. 24f. is also notccvorthy.
After the sheets of vol. ii had been printed off I came
across two other fragments of somewhat similar astrological
texts, which furnish additional illustrations of thc manner in
which the legends of the Creation were connected by thc
later Babylonians with astrological phenomena. The smaller
of these fragments, No. 40,959, the text of which is given in

RIIVEI<SE.

Fragment of an astrological explanatory tent (No. 40,')59)

the accompanying block, preserves a few traces of signs from the
beginning of the obverse and from the end of tlic reverse of
the tablet. A few complete words occur in 1. z of the reverse,
which reads [ . , . . . ]-ti: lib-mi Ti-ainnt napiSta-Jil
l[i- . . . . . ] ; I. 112 of the Seventh Tablet of the
Creation Series reads lih-me (var. li-ih-mi) Ti-aitmt 12;-jir-ta-sir
(var. nu-pi?-ta-Su)Li-si-zb u lib-ri (see above, p 1 0 8 f.), and it
is clear that this line is here quoted upon thc fragment.
Both the obverse and reverse of No. 40,959 resemble the
last column of No. 55,466, etc, in being of an explanatory

nature, and it is probable that the quotation froin the Seventh
Tablet is here introduced in an astrological context.
T h e larger of the two fi-agments is No. 32,574, and the text
block. l'his
of its obverse is published in the acco~npa~iyillg
t e x t also is explanatory, and of ail astrological character, and,
like No. 40,959, it has in some respects a closc conilection
with the Creation Series. Thus 1. z reads [ , , . , .
ALIIM-NUN-NA:nu-zlr s"a "'Anu ""b'2Z u i"[E-n : ] A[SAR]U :
[ . . . . . 1 ; now "'Asa?,u-aliiiz-nulz-na occurs as onc
of the titles of Marduk in 1. 5 of the Seventh Tablet of the

Fragment of an astrological explanatory text (No. 32,574, Obverse).

Creation Series, and with the explanation of the title here
given as "the Light of Anu, E l , and Ea," we may compare
the explanation in 1. 6 of the Seventh Tablet, which reads
mu;-te-EY te-$4 ""A-nim "' Bzl [ Z L "'E-a],"who directeth the
decrees of Anu, Btl, [and Ea]." Moreover, 1. 3 of the fragment
reads [ . . . . . A]LIRI-NUN-NA'ha-YU-ha ?zu-up a-hi

' At the beginning of the line there is hardly room for the
restoration ['"'As~nu-A]LI~%-NUN
N A ; it is prohablc that the line
read ~""AILI~I-NuN-NA,
which may he regarded as a shorter form
of the same title.

a-Zi-i-di-s'u [ . . . . . 1 ; nocvl. 5 of thc Scvcnth Tablet
in-ru-62~nu-7~v[ . . . . . 1,
reads '"'Asauz~-aLi7iz-nun-?ln
and the end of the line may probably be restored from the
fragment as nu-ur [a-bi a-Zi-di-&].' Line g o f the fragment
reads im-bi s'ut?zu-haa-bi ilEni" " " N U - N A ~ ~ - N[ I .R . . . . ] ;
this also possibly refers to Marduk, and may be compared
with the Seventh Tablet, 1. I 16 and 11. I IS ff.

Fragment of an astrological explanatory tent (No. 32,574, Reverse and Edge).

T h e text of the reverse of No. 32,574 (see the accompanying
block) is also explanatory, and reads: ( I ) [ . . . . . ]
(2) S I G I ~ S E
: !n~a-bi: U R : znb-Zui7z : [ . . . . . ] ( 3 ) mu~u-zlJ'a Say Nippu7iXi : iz~L-7~zu
[ . . . . . ] (4) GIS-SID
I<[-IN-GI-RA : hu-la me [ . . . . . ] ( 5 ) ICI-IN-GI : N$pu~'u :
Scc above, p. q z f.

APPEXDIX 1x1.

218

- [ . . . . , ] (6) "'Zu-u iin-&a$kap-pa-s"u z'i-fiir :
. . . ] (7) Sa aiza 6di-Su hay-nu ~a6-ruu 7izu-SaKiL--Su [ . . .
. ] ( 8 ) '"'Kiiz-gu u ""'"'Nisnunu fa "'Aizu
u i " G I~Z U ~ [ ~ . . , . , 1 (9) *Ri"ri"z LU - iiu - MAS. :
si"Dumu-si: ib'Kin-g[u . . . . . ] (lo) [ . . . . . ]
'b'AZ-ma-nu UD-DU AG : [ . . , , , ] (11) [ ~ i ] - & - m u
Sah-ua-at : E-Kur : E - [ . . . . . 1. In 11. 8 f. Kingu is
introduced, but there is no other evidence of a connection
between the Creation Series and this portion of tlie text ;
in fact, 1. 6, beginning, "Zii smote and broke his wing,"
evidently gives a quotation from a legend of the Storm-god
Zii,which has nothing to do with, the Creation Series.
Indirectly, however, this line proves that other Babylonian
legends were, like those of the Creation, connected by tlie
later Babylonians with certain of the heavenly bodies. The
four lines inscribed upon the edge of the tablet give a portion
of the colophon, from the last line of which we learn that the
tablet belonged to a series, the title of which reads [ . . . . ,
"']MarduK u 'b'Sar-pa-ni-tu?u BE-51,' and it is possible that
the other astrological fragments above dcscribed (Nos. 55,466,
etc., and 40,959) are parts of tablets belonging to the same
series. T h e occurrence of Marduk's name in the title is in
accordance with the suggested connection bctween these
fragments and the Creation Series.
1

:a

SID [

. .

z

.

The last two signs are not very carefully written, but they are
distinctly HE& and not &BAR (i.e. ~ U T U S S ~ ~ Wilh
) .
this titic we
may compare that which occurs at the beginning or upon the edge
of many of the late Babylonian astronomical tablets, viz., lizn a-maf
"'BZ u "' BZNi-ia purussii, "At the word of the Lord and of my
Lady, a decision ! " ; cf., e.g., Epping, Asfiunomisches nus Dn&yZon,
p. '53. The BZI and B?/fL-ia are probably Marduk and
Sarpanitum.

IV.

anb f4e Comer of @aBeP.
.IN vol. ii, pl. Ixxiii f. the text is given of a fragment of
a legend (K. 3,657))which was thought at one time by George
Smith and others' to contain an Assyrian version of the
story of the Tower of Babel (cf. Gen. xi, I K). The text is very
broken, but from what remains of col. i it would appear to
be part of a legend concerning a god, or possibly a king, who
plotted evil in his heart and conceived a hatred against the
father of all the gods. In col. i, 11. 5 ff. the passage occurs on
which the supposed parallel with the story of the Towcr of
Babel was based, for these lines were believed to refer to the
building of a tower a t Babylon, and to describe how the
tower erected by the builders in the day was destroyed in
the night by a god, who confounded their speech and confused
their counsel. There is, however, no mention of a tower or
building of any sort, and Rabylon is referred to as suffering
through the evil designs of the god or king, described in 11. 2-4.
Moreover, the lines supposed to recount the destructioli of the
tower by night really describe how the complaints of the
oppressed people prevented the king, or possibly an avenger
of the people, from getting any sleep at night up011 his couc11.
The tablet is too broken to allow of a completely satisfactory
explanation of the nature of the legend, but the rendering

' See Chaldean Account of Ge~zesis,pp. 160 ff., German cd. (edited
by Delitzsch), p. ~ z f.;
z cf. also Bosca~\~en,
Y:S.U.A., I,, pp. 3 o 4 r , ,
and Recoliis of the P c ~ vol.
' , vii, pp. 1 2 9 ff.

of 11. 1-14 given below1 will suffice t o show t h a t t h e suggested
connection between this legend and t h e story of t h e Tower
of Babel was not justified.
A s with t h e story of t h e Towcr of Babel, so also has i t
been claimed t h a t a n Assyrian legend has been found which
presents a close parallel t o t h e story of t h e temptation of
E v e in t h e garden of Eden, narrated in Gen. iii. T h a t t h e
description of paradise in Gen. ii shows traces of Babylonian
influence is certain,%a n d it is not impossible t h a t a Babylonian
legend m a y a t some future time be discovered which bears

' The first fourteen

lines of col. i may be rendered as follows :-

( I ) [ . . . . . -s]u(?)-nzla6-[ . . . . . ] ( 2 ) [ . . . . . Iti-& Lib-6a-Su il-fe-inz-na ( 3 ) [ . . . . . ]a-6i Rn-la < l d ~ ~ < * ~
i-zi-ru (4) [ . , . . . -t]Giz~l<6-6a-k il-fe-inz-fza ( 5 ) [ . . . . .
Bii6ilum] a - m i - i d a-nu il-hi-im ( 6 ) [ ~ i - i b - n ul ?]a-621-t~u~ba-al-11'
dul-la (7) [ . . . . . B Z I I ] I % L ~ la-mi-id
'
a-na il-Rr'im ( 8 ) [li-$-nr]
u ra-6u-u u-ha-al-lu dul-la ( 9 ) [ . . . . . -i]~~i-via-ns-sinn
ka-la u-mi i-lu-id ( l o ) [<I-na fa-az-zi-ijiz-ti-s'i-na <-na 7izn-ai-li
( I I ) u-ul u-hat-fa i i - i f - f a ( I 2 ) [i-n]a zq-ga-fi-Jz~-mafe-me-,?a-am
i-sn-pa-a ( 1 3 ) [a-nu] Eu-ba-al-ku~ut pa-lL1.e pa-~zi-s*u is'-Ru-ufz
(14) [US(?)-tlan-ni!r-ma ui-fak~ki-rami-lih-Sc~-nn . . . . . .

..
.

'I ( I ) [
. . . . . ] their [ .
. . ] ; (2) [ . . . . . ]
his heart plotted evil. (3) [ .
. . . ] the father of the
gods he hated ; (4) [ . . . . . ] his heart plotted evil.
( 5 ) [ . . . . . Babylon] was yoked to forced labour; (6) [small
and] great rendered(?) service. (7) [ . . . . . Bablglon was
yoked to forced labour ; (8) [small] and great rendered(?) service.
(g) [Through] their [ . . . . 1, all day was he alfiicted ;
( l o ) through their lamentation, upon (his) couch ( I r ) he obtained
no sleep. (12) [In] the anger of his heart he put an end to (?)
supplication ; ( 1 3 ) [to] overlhrow the kingdom he set his face.
(I+) [He chanlged (their) understanding, their counsel mas altered
. . . . ." Too little is preserved of cols. ii and iii to allow
of a counected translation, but it may here be noted that col. ii
contains refrrences to the gods ""LUGAL-DUI.(O~
UU:-AZAG-GA
(1. I ) and '"'EN-HI (I. z), and to the goddess ""Dnnz-kl-7ra (1. 8),
and col. iii to the god ""NU-NA~~I-NIR
(1. 5 ) .
a For a furthcr discussion of this subject, scc the Introduction.

.

TFIE TEMPTATION A N D T H E TOWER OF IIAI31:L.

221

a close resembfance t o the story of the temptation of E v e
h y t h e serpent.' T h e tablet which has been supposed t o
contain a n Assyrian version of the story is I<, 3,473
79-74 296 K. 615, which is one of the principal copies
of the Third Tablet of the Creation Series. T h e closing lines
of t h e Third Tablet recount how the gods gathered to a feast
a t Ansar's bidding before they decreed the fate for Marduk,
their avenger' ; the passage which recounts how t h e gods
a t e bread (1. 134) wasbelieved t o contain a reference t o man's
eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge, a n d Marduk was
supposed t o be described in 1. 138, not a s the avenger of the
gods, but as the " Redeemer" of mankind. T h i s suggestion
was never widely adopted a n d has long heen given up, but
i t had meanwhile found its way into some popular w o r k s ;
and, as enquiries are still sometimes made for the Assyrian
version of the story of the Temptation, i t is perhaps n o t
superfluous t o state definitely t h e fact of its non-existence.

+

+

' The cylinder seal, Brit. Mus., No. 89,326, has heen thought to
furnish evidence of the existence of such a legend, as it represents
a male and a female figure seated near a sacred tree, and behind
the female figure is a serpent. Gcorge Smilh published a woodcut
of the scene in The Chaidean Accozrnt o f GcnesLs, p. 91 ; for
a photographic reproduction of the impressio~lof the seal, see my
Bab. Rel. and iMyLh.,p. I 1 3 .
The suggestion was first made in the Bab. and Or. Rec, iv
(1890),pp. 2 5 1 ff.
a See above, p. 56f., 11. 129-138.

I N the following pages a transliteration and a trans1at'Ion are
given of a remarkable "Prayer of the Raising of the Hand "
t o IStar, No. 26,187, the text of which is published in vol. ii,
pls. lxxvff: A n explanation is perhaps necessary of the
reasons which have led to the publication of this tablet in
a book dealing with legends of Creation and with texts connected therewith. I n a previous work, entitled " Babylonian
Magic and Sorcery: I had collected all the texts belonging
to the series o f " Prayers of the Raising of the H a n d " which
were known to me a t the time ; when later on I came across
the text of No. 26,187 it followed that it must necessarily
be published b y itself, apart from other tablcts of its class.
I t would, of course, have been possible t o delay its publication
until it could be included in a work dealing with a number
of miscellaneous religious compositions, but, in view of the
0s".
I.

Siptu zr-sa/-li-hi

6e-lit

6e-li-e-ti i - Lzt

i - /a - a - ti

z. '"'IStar s"a7-?,a-tiicul-[at da-ad-71ze71z1rS-te-Sz-mtte-ui-Se-e-ti
" Y - i n 1 mut-tnl-h-a-ti ra-I.it
''6'2'61
2"

' Iztar, to whom the prayer is offered (cf. 1. l o b ) , is in this linc
and in 1. 105 addressed by the title Irnini ; in I. r z she is addressed
as Gutira. It is well bnown that in course of time I3tar was
identified by the Babylonians and Assyrians with other goddesses,

2z3

A PRAYER TO ISTITAR.

-~
~

interesting nature of its contents, it has seemed preferable
to make it available without further delay for students of
Babylonian religion, by including it as an appendix to the
present work. I t will be seen that the text, both from the
beauty of its language aud from its perfect state of preservation, is one of the finest Babylonian religious compositions
that has yet been recovered. The tablet tncasures Skin. by
zkin., and is of the long narrow shape which is one of the
characteristics of the larger tablets of the series to which it
belongs. From the colophon (cf. Rev., 11. I I I K) we gather
that it was copied from an original a t Rorsippa by a certain
Nergal-balitsu-i!cbi, who 'deposited it as a votive offering in
E-sagila, the temple of Marduk at Babylon, whence it was
probably removed before the destruction of the temple. Thc
text is addressed to I 3 a r in her character as the goddess
of battle, and she is here identified with Irliini and with
Gutira (see below, note). Lines 1-41 contain addresses to
the goddess, descriptive of her power and splendour, and
a t 1. 42 the suppliant begins to make his own personal
petitions, describing his state of affliction and praying for
deliverance. A rubric occurs at the end of the text (cf.
11. 107 ff), giving directions for the performance of ccrtain
ceremonies and for the due recital of the prayer.

1 pray unto thee, lady of ladies, goddess of goddcsscs !
z. 0 Ishtar, queen of all peoples, clircctress of ~nallkind!
3. 0 Irnini,' thou art raised on high, mistress of the Spirits
of heaven ;
4. Thou art mighty, thou hast sovereign power, exalted is
thy name !
5 . Thou art the light of heaven and earth, 0 valiant daughter
of the Moon-god.
I.

--.

--

e.g., Ninni, Nani, Anonitnm, and BElit; and when so identified
she absorbed their names, titles, and attributes. I n these passages
we have two additiolial instances of her identification with othcr
deities.

ow.

6. ?nut-tab-bi-la-athahhri"ia-hi-nn-at t ; ~- ~ I L- zln - ti
7. ba-mz-nzat gi-?nir par-si a-pi-rat a - g-2 - e he - /ZL- t i
8. ."" 6?Ztiti' Su -pzl - u nar - 6%- h i eli ha-Za ilZfziQ' si-rz~

-

I I.

?nut - fa
ad - d i - na - at it 6a YU a
it - bur - ti be - lit tu - Sa ri vzut-tah-ki-pat eriSti-in

12.

"" GGuir-a Sa tu-kzr-;~?z-fa
bal-pat la - 6 i - Sat ~ar-ba-&z

10.

-

15. e-hi-a-urn La iunzu-hi e-hi-a-am Za

par

-

pi

-

hi

16. e-hi-a-am la us-sr~-?.nu:urn"ti#'-hi e-hi-a-a?>z.la inizada#'
parahh?" - hi
17. c-hi-a-am la ra-6a-a-ti e-hi-a-a?% l'n si m - a - ti
IS. '"'A-nu?7z"'B~Zu ""E-a uZ-/u-u-hi inn iiiinip' u-Ta7,-hi~-;~
be-lu-ut-hi

-

' As the determinative AN is ctnployed before the ideogram, it is
possible that here and in il. 29 and 104 it si~onldbe rendered as
tile proper name, or title, BZId (cf. thc preceding note). 3:lsewhere
in the prayer, however, t h e word takes in addition the I s. pron.
suffix (cf. 11. 43, 56, 59, 7 2 , 73, 79, 93, and 94) ; it scems more
probable, therefore, that t h e ideogram is cmployed for the substantive 6Tliz1, "lady."
T h i s line probably continues the class of attributes ascribed t o
t h e goddess in the preceding line, and does not form a contrast
t o it ; the meaning " strength " rather than " friendship " is

A PICAYER TO ISHTAR.

225

6. Ruler of weapons, arbitress of the battle !

7. Framer of all decrees, wearer of the crown of dominion !
8. 0 lady,' majestic is thy rank, over all the gods is it
exalted !
g. Thou art the cause of lamentation, thou sowest hostility
among brethren who are a t peace ;
10 Thou art the bestower of strength !
11. Thou art strong, 0 lady of victory, thou canst violently
attain my desire !
1 2 . 0 G ~ t i r awho
, ~ art girt with battle, who art clothed with
terror,
I 3. Thou wieldest the sceptre and the decision, the control of
earth and heaven !
14. Holy chambers, shrines, divine dwellings, and temples
worship thee !
1 5 . Where is thy name not (heard)? Where is thy decree
not (obeyed) ?
16. Where are thine images not made ? Where are thy
temples not founded ?
17. Where art thou not great? Where art thou not cxalted ?
18. Anu, BEI, and E a have raised thee on high, among the
gods have they made great thy dominion,

therefore to he assigned to if-6a-YU. In support of this view, cf. tllc
attributes in the following lines, and the occurrence of if-bur-ti in
1. 11, where any other meaning but L L T h art
o ~ strong" is out of
the question.
It is clear that in this passage we must assign some such active
meaning to the Ifteal of nahiipu.
See above, p. Z Z Z f., n. I .
The second half of the line is in apposition to the phrase
di6ta u purussZ, "the sceptre" representing the control of earth
and "the decision " that of heaven.
'5

osv.
19.

u-fa-a?-&-hi ina nap-bar '"'lgigi u-;a-ti-ru 7nan-%a-az-hi

-

il8ni" i ru - 6u i - nar - ru - ?u '"'A - nun - nu - h i
Sumu-hi m-US-6u is'- tam ma - ra te - ni - Se - e - t i
23. at - ti - ma
ra
6a - a - ti u ~i - ?a - -a ti
24. nap-kar :a/-mat ha&-$a-diZ nam-maf-fu-u te-ni-ie-e-Li
i-da/-la-Zu bur-di-Ki
25. di-in ha-$u-la-a-ti ina Kit-ti u mi-Sa-ri ta-din-ni at-ti
21.
22.

-

-

27. a-&u-lap-Ki 6e-lit Sam?(#) u ir,ritznz(tim) ri-e-a-at nii?*'
28.

a-pa-a-ti
a-421-lap-ki be-Zit E-an-nu4 kud-du-iu Su - ttllm nzu e l - Zu

29.

a-&u-lap-Ki'" 6?/ti5 uZ a-ni-&aS'p8"-Ki la-si-ma 6ir-ha-a-hi

-

33. pi-ta-a-at

pu.sn-urn-me6

Sa

Ka-li-s"i-na

arddti"

The verb rEbu is here used of the "quaking" of the heaven
and earth (see above, p. 206 f., 1. a), and in the follolring line of
the "trembling" of the gods; for its use in the former sense in
the astrological reports, cf. Thompson, Reports ofthe Magicians and
Astrologers, vol. ii, p. ~ z g .
Literally "the black-headed," i.e. mankind.

A PRAYER T O ISHTAR.

227

19. They have exalted thee among all the Spirits of heaven,
they have made thy rank pre-eminent.
zo. A t the thought of thy name the heaven and the earth
quake,'
21. The gods tremble, and the Spirits of the earth falter.
zz. Mankind payeth homage unto thy mighty name,
23. For thou art great, and thou art exalted.
24. AU mankind,a the whole human race, boweth down before
thy power.
25. Thou judgest the cause of men with justice and
righteousness ;
26. Thou lookest with mercy on the violent man, and thou
settest right the unruly every morning.
27. How long wilt thou tarry, 0 lady of heaven and earth,
shepherdess of those that dwell in human habitations?
28. How long wilt thou tarry, 0 lady of the holy E-antla:
the pure Storehouse?
zg. How long wilt thou tarry, 0 lady: whose feet are
unwearied, whose knees have not lost their vigour ?
30. How long wilt thou tarry, 0 lady of all fights and of the
battle ?
31. 0 thou glorious one, that ragest among the Spirits of
heaven, that subduest angry gods,
32. That hast power over all princes, that controllest the
sceptre of kings,
33. That openest the bonds of all handmaids,

he word i'ak-h is practically synonymous with Eab-Zu, and
conveys the meaning of "destruction " or "violence," rather than
" wrong."
I.e., the temple of IStar in the city of Erech.
See above, p. 224, n. I .
T h e rendering of the word pusun~~izu
is conjeclural.

APPENDIX

228

v

Onv.

34. nu-an-Se-a-at na-an-di-a-at ha-rit-ti ""ls'tar

ra-bu-u

bur-di-ki
35. nu-mir-tuoz di-par Sanz~(e) u i i i ( t i z ) i ' a - ~ u - u ~
a
dn-ad-me
36. iz - zi - it !lab - Zzz la mn - bar a Z i - Zat fnnz-&a-r i

-

37. a-Ru-Ku-u-turn' Sa ana aai-bi nap-bat Sa-hi-na-rrt
S - u i iK-d~~-ti
38. ~lzu- ul?z - mil - turn "' 1s'- tar ml~-$ah-&rat pl4-uh-ri
39. i-lat zikrziti" jJ"IS-tar sinni?iti" ?a Za i-la?rz-ma-&
nzi-Zih-Su ma-am-nzan
40. a-Sar tap-paZ-La-si i-bnl-Znt e"'"f?nitu i - te - ii,- 6i i7znr-su
4 1 . i ; - Si

-

ir'

la

i - Sa - rn a - n ~ i - r u p a - n i - h i

46. a-/iu-Zap zumri-in na-as-si 5% nza-ZIL-74e-Sa-a-ti u dal-&-ti
47. a-&u-lapl(id-hi-iaS~l?iz-ru-sus'a ma-IZI-u &-ti u fa-ni-hi
48. a-&lap

te-ri-ti-ia nn-ns-sa-a~ti e-in-a-ti u daZ-&a-a-ti

' For the meaning of the word ainrkiZtunz, cf. I1 R, pl. 39,
R.2,057, Obv., col. ii, 1. 5, where a-kn-iru-t[u71~]
and n-Snla-Su-/z<m

A PRAYER TO ISIITAlt.

229

34. That art raised on high, that art firmly established,0 valiant Istar, great is thy might!
35. Bright torch of heaven and earth, light of all dwellings,
36. Terrible in the fight, one who cannot be opposed, strong
in the battle !
37. 0 whirlwind,' that roarest against the foe and cuttest off
the mighty !
38. 0 furious Ishtar, summoner of armies !
39. 0 goddess of men, 0 goddess of women, thou whose
counsel none may learn !
40. Where thou lookest in pity, the dead man lives again, the
sick is healed ;
41. The afflicted is saved from his affliction, when he beholdeth
thy face !
42. I, thy servant, sorrowful, sighing, and in distress cry unto
thee.
43. Look upon me, 0 my lady, and accept my supplication,
44. Truly pity me, and hearken unto my praycr !
45. Cry unto me " I t is enough!" and let thy spirit be
appeased !
46. How long shall my body lament, which is full of restlessness and confusion ?
47. How long shall my heart be afflicted, which is full of
sorrow and sighing ?
48. How long shall my omens be grievous in restlessness and
confusion ?
49. How long shall my 11ouse be troubled, which mourlieth
bitterly?

occur as equivalents of two ideograms which form a section by
themselves ; see also Delitzsch, iF(n~zifzizuirie1~6urh,
p. 53.

Onv.

50, a-&u-laphub-ta-ti-iaSa US-ta-bar-ru-u dim-ti u ta-ni-hi
5 I . "'Zr-ni-ni [ . . 1'-i-tzdm la-ab-6u nu-ad-ru lib-ba-hi li-nzl-&a
ri-i-mu Sub-ba-SZL-u ka-bit-ta-hi lip - pa - aS- 7a.
5 3 . dam&Eti" in&" - hi lib - Sa - a e /i ia
54. ina bu-ni-hi nam-ru-ti hi-nis" nap-li-sin-ni ia-tz-fi
5 5 . uk-hi-fi u-pi-:a li1un2ti" Sa zurnri-ca nziru-hi nat?z-ru
LIL-mu?
56. a-di ma-ti ""6Zlfi-iab212pi da-ba-bi-ia ni-kil--inu-u-i~z-~zi-?na

52.

REV.

57. ina sur-ra-a-ti u la hi-%a-a-tii-ha$-pu-du-ni lzm-ni-e-ti

59. a - d i ma - ii '"'bzbi- ia lil- lu

a-ku-u

i-ba-'-an-ni

r i id - n i - 12u - ma ana - k7~ e - ni - if
. .
62. a - jab - bu - ' k i - ma a -gc - z Sa wp-pa-!zu S ~ r uLin-na
61. en - Su -

63. i - & - ' it - ta - nap - ras'

lib - bi hi-ma i$-:ur Sa-ma-mi

64. a-dam-mu-um hi-ma su-urn-ma-turn mu - Si u ur - m
65. nu - an - gu - /a - ku
mas a - bak - h i zar - bii"

-

' T h e scribe has erased the first character of the word and has
not rewritten it.
a T h e meaning assigned to iiXu in the translation is conjectural :
among other passages in which the word occurs, cf. especially
IV R, pl. 27, No. 4, 1. 57, and its context; see also Delitzsch,
ElnndwZyierbuch, p. 377, and Muss-Amolt, Concise Diciionary, p. 481.
Some such general meaning is probably to be assigned to

A PRAYER TO ISHTAR.

23

5 0 How iong shall my spirit (be troubled), which aboundeth
in sorrow and sighing ?
.
1' Irnini, fierce lioness, may thy heart bave
rest !
52. Is anger mercy? Then let thy spirit be appeased !
53. May thine eyes rest with favour upon me ;
54. With thy glorious regard truly in mercy look upon me !
55. Put an end to the evil bewitchments of my body ; let me
behold thy clear light !
56. How long, 0 my lady, shall mine enemies persecute m e ?
5 7 How long shall they devise evil in rebellion and
wickedness,
58. And in my pursuits and my pleasures shall they rage
against me ?
59. How long, 0 my lady, shall the ravenous demon
pursue me ?
60. They have caused me continuous afilicti~n,~
but I have
praised thee.
61. The weak have become strong, but I am weak ;
62. I am sated like a flood which the evil wind lnaketh to
rage.
63. My heart hath taken wing, and hath flown away like
a bird of the heavens ;
64. I moan like a dove, night and day.
65. I a m made desolate: a n d I weep bitterly ;

51. 0 [ .

.

mu@u in this passage; the subject of the verb is probably impersonal, and it may be taken as followed by the double accusative.
It is clear that in this passage an active meaning is to be
assigned to aambru; cf. im-mz+-&ma, V R, pl. 5 5 , 11. 2 7 and 37,.
and u-mu-ka nam-mar, 8%-j-z3, 4,344, etc. (P:S.B.R.,xviii, p. q B ) ,
cited by Muss-Amolt, Concise Dictionary, p. 684.
iv, I from nag&, cf. Syr. n'gaI.

REV.

66.ina ' - % - a a - a S u ~ n - Y U - ; m - a tk a bitti
67. m i - nn - a e - pu - ns" zli - ia ZL '"if-tar-in a-nn-ku
68. ki-z la pa-lib ili-ia u '"'iStari-ia alza Kn z) - je - i&

-

69. Sak-nu-nim-ma mur-;u ti-'-i bu-ln-u&-ku-u u ful-ln-z~&-ti
70. fak-na-ni nd-da-a-ti sub-bur pa-ni u ma-li-e lib-6n-n-ti

71. UZ-zu UR-ga-ti me-nut' ilEizi" 24 a - nze - in - t i
72. a-ta-mar ""b2lti-ia am?*' uk-ku-lzi-ti arb?" na-an-du-ru-ti
fandti*' fa xi-&ti
73. a-ta-mar ""b?lti-za jib-& i-Si-ti u sub - nzas" - ti
74. u - Kal - la - an - n i 77zu - u - tu u
in$ - fa - &n
75. Su-bar-ru-ur sa-gi-e-a Su-bar-rn-mt a fir ti
76. eli brli bzbi u bar-da-a-ti-ia fa-&1r-w71z-nza-ti
tab-Rat
77. ili-ia ana n-far &-nim-~nasu&-bu-ru pa nu fu
78. sap - hat z l - la - ti ta - bi - ~ z ipur ru nr
79. u-pa-&a a-na '"'bzlti-ia ka-a-ii i6 -&I - k i U Z I Z ~ "- ai
80. n - sal - li - hi
kn - a - fi ' - il - ti pu - uf
81. pu-ut-ri ar-ni2 &-ti
ba6-la-ti u
&i- ti -

-

rz
ti

82. m i - e - f i & a b - l a - t i - i n l i - R i - e un - ~ z i - n i - ia
83. YU urn - m i - ia K i - rim - ia Su-bar-ra-ai ink-ni

-

84. ju-te-;i-ri kib-si nam-ris" e-til-lif il-ti a7izPlfiti" lu-6a-' s0il.z
85. h i - 6i - nza

'

ina

h i - bi - ti - k i ilu xi-nu-zi li-is-linz

Literally, " numbers of, the host of."
Under the line, and between the signs n i and Sii; the scribe
has written the division mark followed by the word i-Si-ti, "my

A FIlAYER TO ISHTAR.

233

66. With grief and woe my spirit is distressed.
67. What have I done, 0 my god and my goddess?
68. Is it because I feared not my god or my goddcss that
trouble hath befallen me ?
69. Sickness, disease, ruin, and destruction are come upon me ;
70. Troubles, turning away of the countenance, and fullless
of anger are my lot,
71. And the indignation and the wrath of all' gods and men.
72. I have beheld, 0 my lady, days of affliction, months or
sorrow, years of misfortune ;
73. I have beheld, 0 my lady, slaughter, turmoil, and
rebellion.
74. Death and misery have made an end of me !
75. My need is grievous, grievous is my humiliation ;
76. Over my house, my gate, and my fields is affliction
poured forth.
77. As for my god, his face is turned elsewhere ;
78. My strength is brought to nought, my power is broken !
79. But unto thee, 0 my lady, do I give heed, I have kept
thee in my mind ;
80. Unto thee therefore do I pray, dissolve my ban !
81. Dissolve my sin,2 my iniquity, my transgression, and my
offence !
82. Forgive my transgression, accept my supplication!
83. Secure my deliverance, and let me be loved and carefully
tended !
84. Guide my footsteps in the light, that among men I may
gloriously seek my way!
85. Say the word, that at thy command my angry god may
have mercy,
confusion"; he probably had omitted the word by mistakc and
intended it to be inserted after ar-?ti.

88.6i-Zi-ti'
Li-in-nu-pi-+
89. su - pi - i&- tu
i L - la - ti
go. tavba~a l i p id-tam-dl-lu
91. m u g - v i L i - b i - e n a $ - p i - i a

dilz$

pa

-

-

ri
$11~

su pu 74
3 - m e - e su-pi-e-a

[ernsure by the scribe] '
92. h i nis" nap - Li - sin - ni - ma
93. a-di ma-ti i's'b~lti-iazi-nu-ti-ma sub-bu-ru pa-nu-ki

-

94. a-di ma-ti "'bzlti-ia ra-'-ba-ti-ma uz-zu-aa-at kab-ta-at-hi
95. tir-ri ki-Sad k i Sa iftu ad-di-ia a-mat damiktim(tim)
pa-7zi-ki Tuk-ni
96. hi-ma mi9'pa-Sr nZ9-i ha-bit-ta-hi Zz) - pa - as'- va
97. ik-du-ti-in hi-ma +a@-@a-ru ln - ha6 - bi - is
98. iab-su-ti-ia kun-nu-Tim-ma Sn-pal-si-@i ina Snp-Zi-in

9 9 . 1 ~ - p n - u - a u S U - L u - u - a lil-22-ku
ta ai - ra - tu - k i rub - ba - a - ti lib - Sa - a
101. a-mi-vu-u-a ina saki li-Say-bu-u zi kiv
100.

,

,

-

'"'I?- t a v - ma
I 04. '"'bdti
ma

103.

"

-

eli-ki
eli - in
ki

si - rat ""IS-far-ma Tar-rat
:i - rrzt "' b2lti - ma Tar - mt

' Probably Perm. !<a1 from bZZu ; the word, however, is possibly
the lengthened form of b&i, its occurrence being due t o the
necessities of rhythm.

A PRAYER TO ISHTAR.

235

86. And that my goddess, who is wroth, may turn again !
87. The darkness hath settled down, so let my brazier be
bright ;
88. Thou art the ruler,' let then my torch flame forth !
89. May my scattered strength be collected ;
go. May the fold be wide, and may my pen be bolted fast !
91. Receive the abasement of my countenance, give ear unto
my prayer,
92. Truly pity me, and [accept my supplication] !
93. How long, 0 my lady, wilt thou be angry and thy face
be turned away?
94. How long, 0 my lady, wilt thou rage and thy spirit be
full of wrath ?
95. Incline thy neck, which (is turned) away from my affairs,
and set prosperity before thy face ;
96. As by the solving waters of the river may thine anger be
dissolved !
97. My mighty foes may I trample like the ground ;
98. And those who are wroth with me mayest thou force into
submission and crush beneath my feet !
99. Let my prayer and my supplication come unto thee,
100. And let thy great mercy be upon me,
101. That those who behold me in the street may magnify
thy name,
102. And that I may glorify thy godhead and thy might
before mankind !
103 IStar is exalted! IStar is queen !
104. My lady 3 is exalted ! My lady is queen !
The scribe has erased the second half of the line; we may
restore some such phrase as Zi-ki-e un-nz'-ni-ia, as suggested
in the translation.
See above, p. z t q , n. I .

Rev.

105. '"'Zr-ni-ni aza- at '"'Sin ka-rit-ti ma -hi - ra uZ iSat

IcI 1i15 T A R AD gufui~11.u
a?*#u??zU elh4 tasallah
Zibn&tipi Zihbi ,Jjal&!zi(?) tanaddi(di)

107. epus"alll2ri
IV

109. tattabah(a/c)

n - a tanakki(/ci)-ma Z
mr-nu-lu an-ni-tu aiza pdn ""lf-tar

I

lo. faZultu faizitu tamannu(nu) IcI-ZA-ZA-ma

tuf-hip2

nfza ai hi-ha

la tabari
II

I. &)tu fa-ku-turn '"'IS- far ?izu-nam-mi-rat kib-ra-a-ti4

I 1 2 . gab-ri

Buff-sipx' kilua labiri-&L """Nel-gal-6aZri;-su-ik-bi
n$iZ ""A-ta-rad-hal-me "'""'asz~u

113. ana baZ&!i-fu i&r

' Line

ibri-ma

ina

E-SUE-ila u-kin

106 gives the title of the prayer; then follows a rubric

of four lines giving directions for the performance of certain
ceremonies and for the due recital of the prayer.
I n the four bricks, which, if the suggested rendering is correct,

A PRAYER TO ISIITAIt.

105.

237

Irnini, the valiant daughter of the Moon-god, hath not
a rival !

106. Prayer of the Raising of the Hand to Igtar.'
This shalt thou do . . . . a green bough shalt thou
sprinkle with pure water ; four bricks from a ruin
shalt thou set in place ;
108. a lamb shalt thou take ; with sarbatu-wood shalt thou
fill (the censer), and thou shalt set firc (thereto) ;
sweet-scented woods, some upuntu-plant and some
cypress-wood
109. shalt thou heap up ; a drink offering shalt thou offer, but
thou shalt not bow thyself down. This incantation
before the goddess Igtar
110. three times shalt thou recite, . . . . and thou shalt
not look behind thee.

107

0 exalted Iitar, that givest light unto the (four)
quarters of the world ! "
112. (This) copy from Borsippa, (made) like unto its original,
hath Nergal-balztsu-ikbi, the son of Atarad-lialme, the
magician,
113. written for (the preservation of) his life, and he hath
revised it, and hath deposited it within the ternplc of
E-sagila.

II

r.

"

are here directed to be brought from a ruin, we may perhaps see
a symbolical offering to IStar in her character of the goddess of

battle and destruction.
Possibly kiza-aa-ma, but cf. Briinnow, No. 9,843.
Line I I r gives the catch-line for the next tablet.

Jnbicee; &eo66art, etc.

PLATE.

1.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 11. 1-16.
Traces of catch-line to Tabl. 11,
and colophon.
No. 93,015, Obv.:
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 11. 1-16.
81-7-27, 80, Obv. :
,, 11. 31-56.
Rev. :
,,
11. I 18-142.
K. 3,938. Obv. :
,,
11.33-42.
,,
11, 128-142.
,, Rev. :
,, 11. 124-142, and
No. 93,015, Rev. :
colophon.
Tabl. 11, 11. I 1-29.
No. 38,396, Obv. :
,,
Rev. :
$9
11. (105)-(132).
,, 11. 32-58.
K. 4,832, Obv. :
,, Rev. :
,. 11. (104)-(138).
79-7-8, 178, Obv. :
7
11. (69)-(75).
,
11. (76)-(85).
,,
Rev. :
K. 292, Rev. :
9,
11. (131)-(140),
catch-line to Tabl. 111,
and colophon.
Tabl. 111, 11. 1-56.
K. 3,473, etc., Obv. :
,, Obv. (cont.) :
,
11. 57-85.
,, 11. 86-113.
,, Rev. :
,, 11. 114-138, and
,, Rev. (cont.) :
catch-line to Tabl. IV.
,, 11. 38-55, or
96-1 I 3.

K. 5,419~,Obv. :
,, Rev. :

..

Cr. Ser., Tabl. 111, 11. 47-77.
,,
11. 78-105.
,,
,,
11.69-76.
I,
11.77-85.
,
11.73-86.
joined to 82-9-18, 5,448 ; see vol. ii,
pl. xxxiv.
8 3-1-18, 1,868 :
joined to 82-4-18, 6,950; see vol. ii,
pl. xxix.
82-9-18, 1,403:
joined to 82-9-18, 6.316 ; see vol. ii,
pls. xxv ff.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV, 11. 1-44.
No. 93,016, Obv.:
,,
Rcv.:
,,
,,
11. 116-146,
catch-line to Tabl. V,
and colophon.
K. 3,437, etc., Obv. :
,
11.36-39.
,, Obv. (cont.) : ,,
,
11.60-83.
,, Rev.:
,,
11. 84-107.
,, Rev. (cont.) : ,,
,,
11. 108-1 rq.
R. z, 83 :
*,
,
11. 117-129
No. 93,OSI, Obv. :
,.
11.42-34.
Rev. :
11. 85-94.
79-7-8, 251, Ohv. :
11.35-49.
Rev. :
,,
11. 103-107.
I<. ~ , + z o cObv.
,
:
,,
,,
11.74-92,
,,
Rev. :
,
11. 93-1 19.
K. 3,567, etc., Obv. :
,,
Tabl. V, 11. 1-26.
Rev. : catch-line toTahl.VI, and colophon.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. V, 11. 1-18.
I<. 8,526, Obv.:
,, Rev. :
,,
,,
11. (138)-(140).
I<. 3,449~.Obv. :
,, 11. (66)-(74),
,,
Rev. :
,>
,,
11. (75)-(87).
see Appendix 11, p. 194.
I<. 12,0006:
see Appendix 11, p. 197 f.
I<. 14,949 :
see Appendix 11, pp. 197 ff.
I<. 3,445, etc. :
,, Rev. (cont.) : see Appendix 11, pp. 198 ff.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 11. I 5-45.
K. 8,522, Obv. :
,, Rev. :
,.
,,
11. 105-r37.
K. 9,267, Obv. :
,,
11.40-47.
,, Rev. :
,, 11. 109-138.

No. 93,017, Obv. :
,,
Rev. :
K. 8,575, Obv. :
,, Rev. :
K. 8,524 :
83-1-18, 2,116 :

....

241

INDEX TO TEXTS.

PLATE.

29-30. K. 3,364 :
31. I<. 7,067 :
I<. 10,791 :
K. 8,572 :

see Appendix 11, pp. 2 0 1 ff.
see Appendix 11, p. 195. note I .
see Appendix 11, p. 195, note I .
see Appendix 11, p. 195, note 1 .
X. I 1,048 :
see Appendix 11, p. 195, note I .
K. r z,oooc:
see Appendix 11, p. 195, note I .
R. 982, etc. :
see Appendix 11, p. 195. note I .
see Appendix I, p. 170 f.
32. S. 747 :
33. R. 282, Obv. :
see pp. 116 ff.
34.
,, Rev. :
see p. rzo f.
D.T. qr :
see pp. 122 ff.
35-38. 81-5-12, 1,048 :
see pp. 130 ff.
39-41. K. 5,418a and I<. 5,640: see pp. 140 ff.
TEXTS, PUBLISHED
B. SUPPLEMENTARY

IN

VOL. 11,

PLATESI-LXXXIV.
PLATE.

I.
11.
111.
IV.
V.
VI.

VII.
VIII.
IX.

x.

XI.
XII.
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
XVI.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. I. 11. 1-16.
No. 45,528, etc., Obv.:
,>
Obv. (cont.):
,,
,, 11. 17-32.
Obv. (cont.) :
,,
,, 11.33-48.
,,
Rev. :
,, 11. 11 1-124.
,,
,,
Rev. (cont.):
,,
,, 11. 125-139.
Rev. (cont.):
,,
,, ~ I . I ~ o - I ~ z ,
,,
catch-line to
Tabl. II,and
colophon.
,, 11. 11-21.
No. 35,134:
No. 36,688:
,,
,, 11.31-43.
No. 36,726:
,,
,, 11. 28-33.
No. 46,803, Obv. :
,,
,, 11. 46-60.
,,
Obv. (cont.) :
,,
,, 11. 62-67.
,,
Rev. :
,,
,, 11.83-90.
PI
Rev. (cont.) :
,,
,, 11. 91-103.
,, 11. 93-104.
82-9-18, 6,879, Rev.:
,,
Rev. (cont.) : .,
,, 11. 105-1 18.
No. 40,559, Obv. :
,, Tabl. 11, 11. 1-10.
,,
Obv. (cont.) :
,,
,, 11. 11-20.
,,
Obv. (cont.) :
,,
,, 11. 2 1-30.
SF

16

INDEX TO TEXTS.

242

PLATE.

XVII. No. 40,559,
XVIII.
,,
XIX.
XX.
,,
XXI.
,,

Obv. (cont.): Cr.
Rev. :
Rev. (cant.) :
Rev. (cant.) :
Rev. (cant.) :

XXII. No. 92,632, etc., Obv.:
XXIII.
,,
Obv. (cont.)

:

Rev. :
XXIV.
,,
Rev. (cant.):
XXV. 82-9-18,1,403, etc., Obv. :
XXVI.
,,
Obv. (cant.) :
XXVII.
Rev. :
XXVIII.
,,
Rev. (cont.) :
XXIX. 82-9-1 8, 6,950, etc. :

XXX.
=I.

XXXII.
XXXIII.
XXXIV.
XXXV.
XXXVI.
XXXVII.

No. 42,285, Obv. :
,,
Obv. (cant.) :
Rev. :
,,
Rev. (cont.) :
82-9-1 8. 5.448. etc. :
No. 92,629, Obv. :
Obv. (cant.) :
,,
Rev. :
I,

XXXVIII. No. 91,139, etc., Obv. :
Obv. (cont.) :
XXXIX
,,
Obv. (cant.) :
XL.
,,
Obv. (cant.) :
XLI.
.,
Rev. :
XLII.
,,
XLIII.
,,
Rev. (cont.) :
XLIV.
,,
Rev. (cont.) :
XLV.
,,
Rev. (cant.) :
XLVI. No. 35,506, Obv. :
XLVII.
Obv. (cont.) :

,,

Rev. :

Ser., Tabl. II,11. 31-40,
,,
,,I l . ( r ~ ~ j - ( r ~ g ) .
,,
,, ll.(120)-(128).
,,
,,lI.(129j-(137j.
,,
j,ll.(138j7(~4~),
catch-line to
Tabl. II1,and
colophon.
,.
,, 11.14-25.
,,
,, 11.26-29.
,,11.(114)-(119).
,,
,, ll.(izo)-(131).
,, Tabl. 111, 11. 5-15,
,,
,, 11.52-61.
,,
,, 11.62-71.
,,
,, 11. 72-128.
,, 11. 19-26 or
77-84.
,, 11. 46-57.
,,
11.58-68.
11.69-77.
,,
,, 11.78-87.
,,
,, 11.64-72.
,, Tabl. VI, 11. 1-10.
,,
,, 11. 11-21.
,,
,, 11. 138-146,
catch - line to
Tabl. VII, and
colophon.
,, Tabl.VI1, 11. 3-12.
,,
, II. 13-21.
,,
,, 11. 22-30.
,,
,, 11. 31-40,
,.
,, 11. 106-1 14.
,,
,, 11. 115-123.
,,
,, 11. rzq-132.
,,
,, 11. 133-141.
.,
,, 11.14-30.
,,
,, 11. 3'-36.
,,
,, 11. 105-120.

.

..

I N D E X TO TEXTS.

243

PLATE.

XLVIII. No. 35,506, Rev. (cont.) : Cr. Ser.,Tabl.VII, 11.1z1-142.
XLIX-L. 82-7-11, 4,005 :
see pp. 124ff.
LI.
S. I r, etc., Obv. :
Commentary to Cr. Ser.,

LII.
LIII.
LIV.
.,

LV.

LVI.
LVII.
LVIII.

LIX.

Tabl. VII, 11. 1-5, 1 7 - 2 1 ,
etc. ; scc Appcndix I,
pp. 158 ff.
Rev. :
Cornm. to Tabl. VII, 11. 106109, etc. ; see Appendix 1,
p. 167 f.
Rev. (cont.) : Comm. to Tabl. VII, 11. 109,,
I I 2 , etc. ; see Appendix I,
p. 168.
82-3-23, 15I :
Comm. to Tabl. V I I ; see
Appendix I , p. ,162.
K. 4,406, Rev. :
Comm. to Tabl. VII (I<I<.
13,761, 8,519, etc.); see
Appendix I, pp. 163 ff.
3,
Rcv. (cont.): Comm. to Tabl. V I I (ICIC.
13,761, 8,519, etc.); see
Appendix I, pp. 163 ff.
S. 1,416 :
Comm. to Tabl. VII, 11. 9-10,
etc. ; see Appendix I,
p. 16of.
R. 366, etc., Obv. :
Comrn. t o Tabl. VII, 11.9-1 3 ;
see Appendix I, p. 160.

,,

Cornm. to Tabl. VII, 11. r 14I I 8, etc. ; see Appendix I,
p. 168f.
Rev. (cont.) : Comm. to Tabl. VII, 1. I 19 ;
Cr. Ser., Tabl.VI1, 11. 120124, and colophon; see
Appendix I, p. 169.
I<. z,o5 j, Obv. :
Comm. toTabl.VII,II. 17-19;
see Appendix I, p. 161.
,, Rev. :
Comm. to Tabl. VII, 11. 108I lo, etc. ; see Appendix I,
p. 167 f.
Rev. :

244

INDEX TO TEXTS.

PLATE.

LX.

I<. 2,053, Rev. (cont.) : Cornm. to Tabl. VII, 1. I I I ,
etc. ; see Appendix I,
p. 168.
K. 8,299:
Comm.to Tabl.VII(I<. 12,830,
etc.) ; see Appendix I,
p. 162f.
LXI. I<. 2,107, etc., Obv. :
see Appendix I, pp. 1 7 1 ff.
LXII.
,,
Obv. (cont.): see Appendix I, p. 173 f.
see Appendix I, pp. 175 17.
R. 395 :
LXIII. No. 54,228 :
see Appendix I, pp. 175 fl.
see Appendix 11, p. zoz f.
LXIV-LXVI. No. 33,85 r :
LXVII-LXXII. No. 55,466, etc. : see Appendix 111, pp. 208 ff.
see Appendix IV, p. 2 I 9 f.
LXXIII-LXXIV. K. 3,657 :
see Appendix V, pp. zzz ff.
LXXV-LXXXIV. No. 26,187 :
C.

TEXTS,
PUBLISHED
SUPPLEMENTARY
I, 11, AND 111.

IN

APPENDICES

APPENDIX.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII, 11. 1-18.
,,
,,
between 11.47
and 10s.
K. 13,761 :
,*
,,
betwcenll.q7
and 105.
I<. 8,s I 9 :
,,
,,
betwcenll.47
and 105.
I<. 13,337 :
,,
,,
betweenll.47
and 105.
Parallel texttoTab1. V I I ; seepp. 175 ff.
R. 2, 538 :
K. 5,233 :
,,
,,
see p. I 80 f.
K. 7,871 :
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I, 11. 33-47.
,,
11.50-63.
K. 4,488 :
I<. 10,008 :
,,
Tabl. 11, between 11.
(85) and (104).
K. 13,774:
Tabl. V, 11. 6-19.
I<. 11,641, Obv. :
,
11.14-22.
,,
Rev :
,, 11. (128)-(140),
catch-llne to Tdbl. VI,
and colophon.

I, p. 159. K. 2,854:
I, p.161. I<. 12,830:

I, p. 164.
I, p. 165.
I, p. 166.
I , p. 176.

I, p 180.
11, 1). 183.
11,p. 185.
11, p. 189.

11, p. 191.
11,p. 192.
11, p. 193.

245

INDEX TO TEXTS.

APPENDIX.

11, p. 194.
11, p. 196.
11, p. 200.
11, p. 201.
111, p. 205.
111, p. 215.
111,p. 216.
111, p. 217.

Poss. frag. Cr. Ser. ; see p. 194 f.
see p. I 96 f.
see p. 128 f.
see p. 128 f.
see pp. 204 ff.
Astrol. expl, text; see p. 2 1 5 f.
see p. z I 6 f.
,,
Rev. :
,,
see p. 217 f.

79-7-8, 47 :
S. 2,or3:
82-9-18, 5,3 1 1 :
s. 1,704:
K. 3,351 :
No. 40,959 :
No. 32,574, Obv. :

,,

TEXT.

REGISTRATION NO.

CONTENTS.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. 11,
11. (131)-(140).
K. 2.053.
Vol. 11, PIS. lix-lx.
Comm., Cr. Ser.VII:
seepp. 161, 167 f.
K.2,107-kK. 6,086. Vol. 11, PIS. Ixi-lxii.
see pp. 171 ff.
K. 2,854.
App. 1, p. 159.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VlI,
11. 1-18.
K. 3,351.
App. 111, p. 205.
see pp. zo4ff.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 29-30, see App. 11, p.
K. 3,364.

K. 292.

Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 6.

201

,,

K, 3,437+R. 641.
K. 3,445 +R. 396.

,,

,,

K, 3,449a.

,,

,,

pls. 16-19.

ff.

Cr. Ser., Tabl.
IV, 11. 36-119.
p l s 24-25, see App. 11, p.
'97 ff.
pl. 23.
Cr. Ser.,Tabl.V,
11. (66)-(87).

INDEX TO TEXTS.

-RBGlSTRATlON NO.

TEXT.

K. 3,473+79-7-8,
Cun. Txts., XIII, .
pls. 7-9.
.
296+11.615.
K. 3,567+K. 8,588.
~9
,, pl. 22.

CUNTKNTS.

Cr. Ser., Tabl.
111, 11. 1-138.
Cr. Ser., Tabl.V,
11. 1-26.
Vol. 11; pls. Ixxiii-lxxiv.
see App. IV, p.
zrgf.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 3.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I.
11. 33-42, 128-142.
Vol. 11, pls. liv-lv.
Comm., Cr. Ser. VII ;
see ..
DP. 16:- ff.
App.
11,
p,
185.
Cr.
Ser.,
Tabl. I ,
- 11.50-63 ; seepp. 185 ff.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 5.
Cr.Ser.,Tabl.II,
11. 32-58, (104)-(138).
App.
see p. I 80 f.
.. I , p.
. 180.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 39-40.
see pp. 140ff.
,, ~ 1 . 1 .
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 1-16.
,,
,, I 2 I . Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV,
11. 74-1
. , 19.
,,
,, pl. 41.
see pp. 14off.
see I<. 2,107.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 9.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 111,
11. 38-55, or 96-1 13.
,,
,, pl. 31.
see App. 11, p.
195, n. I .
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I ,
App. 11, p. 183.
11.33-47 ; seepp. 183 ff.
Comm., Cr. Ser. V I I ;
Vol. 11, PI, lx.
see p. 162 f.
Cr. Ser., 'l'abl. VII,
App. I, p. 165.
between 11.47 and 105.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 26-27. Cr. Ser., Tabl.
VII,lI. 15-45, '05-137.
,, pl. 12.
Cr. Ser., Tabl.
111, 11. 75-86.
,,
,, pl. z j.
Cr. Ser., Tabl.V,
11. 1-18, (~38)-(140).
,,
,, pl. 31.
see App. 11, p.
195, n. 1.

247

INDEX TO TEXTS.

REGISTRATION NO.

K.8,575.

TEXT.

Cun. Txts., XIII, pl.

CONTENTS.

12.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. 111,
11. 69-85.

see K. 3,567.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 28.

s.i,704.
S.2,013.
D.T.41.

Cr. Ser., Tabl.VI1,
II.qo-q7,1og-138.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 11,
App. 11, p. 189.
between 11. (85) and
(104) ; see pp. 187 8.
Cnn. Txts., XIII, PI. 3;. see App. 11, p. 195,
n. I .
,, pl. 31. see App. 11, p. 195,
,,
n. I .
Cr. Ser., Tabl. V,
App. 11, p. 192 f.
11. 14-22 (seepp. 192 ff.),
(128)-(140).
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 24. see App. 11, p. 194.
I?
,, pl. 31. s e e A p p . 1 1 , ~ .195,
n. I .
Cr.
Ser.,
Tabl.
VII,
App. I, p. 163.
between 11.47 and 105.
,, p. 166.
Cr. Ser., Tabl.VI1,
between 11.47 and 105.
,, P 164.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII,
between 11.47 and 105.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. V,
App. 11, p. 191.
11.6-19; see pp. 190 ff.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. zq, see App. 11,p. I 97 f.
Vol. 11, pls. li-liii, lv. Comm., Cr. Ser. VII ;
see pp. 158 ff., 167 f.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 32. see App. I, p. 170 f.
see S. I I.
Comm., Cr. Ser. VII ;
Vol. 11, pl. Iv.
see S. I I .
see p. 128 f.
App. 11, p. z o ~ .

,, P 196.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 34.

see p. 196f.
see pp. 1 2 2 ff.

INDEX TO TEXTS.

TEXT.

REDISTKATION NO.

R.282.
R.366480-7-19,
288+293.

R. 395.

R.396.
R.615.
R.641.
R.982 + 80-7-18,

CONIXNTS.

Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. 33-34. see pp. I 16 ff.
Comm., Cr. Ser. VII ;
Vol. 11, pls. lvi-lviii.
see pp. 160, 168 f.
see App. I, pp. 175 ff.
Vol. 11, pl. lxii.
See K. 3,445.
see I<. 3,473.
See K. 3,437.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 31. see App. 11, p. 195.
n.

178.

R. 2, 83.
R. 2, 538.
79-7-8, 47.
79-7-8, 178.

,,

,,

pl. 1 9 .

App. I, p. 176.
App. 11, p. 194.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 6.

,,

,,

pl. zo.

see I<. 3,473.
see R. 982.
see R. 366.
see R. 366.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl.

z.

Vol. 11, PI. liv.

Cun. Txts., pls. 35-38.
see No. 93,01j.
Vol. 11, pls. xlix-I.
,, pis. xxv-xxviii.
see No. 93,016.
App. 11, p. zoo.
Vol. 11, PI. xxxiv.
see 82-9-18, 1,403.
Vol. 11, pls. xii-xiii.

I.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. lV,
11. 117-129.
see pp. 175 ff.
see p. 194 f.
Cr. Ser.,Tabl. 11,
11. (69)-(85).
Cr. Ser., Tabl. IV,
11. 35-49, 103-107.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 31-56, 118-142.
Comm., Cr. Ser.VI1;
s e e p . 162.
see pp. I 30 ff.
see pp. I 24 ff.
Cr. Ser., TabL. 111,
11.5-15,52-128.
see p. 128 f.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 111,
11. 64-72.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 93-118.

z49

INDEX TO TEXTS.

REGISTRATION NO.

82-9-18, 6,950+
83-1-18, 1,868.
83-1-18, 1,868.
89-1-18, 2,116,
884-19, 13.
No. 26,187.
No. 32,574.
No. 33,851.
No. 35,134.

TEXT.
Vol. 11, pl. xxix.

CONTENTS.

Cr. Ser.,Tabl. 111,
11. 19-26 or 77-84.

see 82-9-18, 6,950.
see 82-9-18, 5,448.
see No. 93,017.
Vol. 11, pls. Ixxv-lxxxiv. see App.V,pp. 22zff.
see pp. 2 I 6 ff.
App. 111, p. 216 f.
Vol. 11, pls. lxiv-lxvi.
seeApp. 11, p. 202 f.
,, pl.vii.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 11-21,
NO.35,506.
,, pls. xlvi-xlviii.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. VII,
11. 14-36, 105-142.
No. 36,688.
,, pl.vii.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 38-43.
No. 36,726.
,, pl.viii.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 28-33
Cun.
Txts.,
XIII,
pl.
4
.
No. 38,396.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 11,
11. I 1-29, (105)-(132).
No. 40,559.
Val. 11, pls. xiv-xxi.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 11,
11. 1-40, (II I)-(140).
No. 40,959.
App. 111, p, 215.
s e e p , 2 1 5 f.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 111,
No. 42,285.
Vol. 11, pls. xxx-xxxiii.
11. 46-87.
NO.45,528+46,614. ,,
pls. i-vi.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 1-48, 111-1 39.
NO.46,614.
see No. 45,528.
No. 46,803.
Vol. 11, pls. ix-xi.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,

11.46-60,62-67,8
3-103.
No. 54,228.
,, pl. lxiii.
see App. I, pp. 175 ff.
No. 55,466+55,486+
55,627.
,, pis. lxvii-lxxii see App. 111, pp. 208 ff.
No. 55.486.
see No. 55,466.
No. 55,627.
see No. 55,466.
No. 91,139+93,073. Vol. 11, pis. xxxviii-xlv.
Cr. Ser., Tabl.VI1,
11. 3-40, rob-141.

INDEX TO TEXTS

250

REGISTRATION NO.

No,92,629.
No.92,632+93,048.
No.93,015
(82-7-14,

TEXT.

COhTENTS.

Vol. 11, pls. xxxv-xxxvii.

402).

No.93,016
(82-9-18,

3,737).

NO.93,017

,,

pls. xxii-xxiv.

Cr. Ser., Tabl. VI,
11. 1-21, 138-146.
Cr. Ser., Tabl. 11,

11, 14-29> (114)-(131).
Cun. Txts., XIII, pls. I , 3. Cr. Ser., Tabl. I,
11. 1-16, 124-142.
,,
,, pls. 1 4 - 1 5 Cr. Ser., Tabl.
IV, 11. 1-44,
116-146.

,>

,,

pls.

10-1

(88-4-19, 13).

No.93,048.
No.93,061.

see No. 92,632.
Cun. Txts., XIII, pl. 20.

NO.93,073.

see No. 91,139.

r.

Cr. Ser., Tabl.
111, 11. 47-105.

Cr. Ser.,Tabl. IV,
11.42-54, 85-94.

K

I ugallu,
"hurricane" : Tabl. I,
.
1. rzz (p. 18); Tabl. 11,
n, enclitic interrogative particle :
1. 28 (p. 26) ; Tabl. 111,
Iab-6a-su-u, p. zjo, 1. 52.
1. 3z ( P 42), 1. 90 ( P 50).
abubu, " deluge ; thunder adfi,
"age ": plur. a-di (var.
bolt(?)": a-6u-ba (var.ba),
a-di-i), Tabl. I,1. I I (p. 4).
Tabl. IV, 1. 49 (p. 64);
ftdfi,
"
course, way, affair " :
a-bu-6a, Tabl. IV, I. 7q
.ad-di-ia, p. 234, 1. 95.
(P. 68).
abiku, 111 I , " to cause to bring, idu, " side" ; idu;, F,'tothe side
of " : i-du-us' sa-$a-m
to cause to be brought" :
(var. m), Tabl. IV, 1. 44
Imver. Eu-61-ha. Tabl. 111.
( P 62).
1 . 8 ( p 38).
abitlu, I I , " t o bring"; I z, " t o idu, " t o know ; to choose (?) " :
e-du-u, Tabl. I, 1. 135
bringont,toproclaim(?)" :
lit (var. li-;/)-tab-baI,Tabl.
(p. 20); Tabl. 11, 1. 41
VII, 1. 33 (p. 98); lit
(p. 26) ; Tabl. 111, 1. 45
(var. Ii-it) -/a-bal, Tabl.
( P 441, 1. 103 (P. 5".
uddu, "daylight."
VII, I. 1 2 2 (p. 110).
abitru, I I , " t o be strong" ;
uddakam, adv., "in the mornI 2 , do. : Perm. I/-bur-ti,
ing, every morning " :
p. 224, 1. I I .
ud-da-kam, p. 226, 1. 26.
itbaru, " strength " : it-ha-ru, uddfi, "trouble " : plur. ud-dap. 224, 1. lo.
a-ti, p. 232, 1. 70.
eberu, I I : e-6i-m, p. 167.
edelu, I I , " t o bolt!'
I z, " t o pass through, to
I11 z, "to be bolted ":
force a way into" : i-125liT-tam-di-Iu, p. 234, 1. go.
bi-ru. Tabl. VII, 1. 108 adiru, I z, " t o he troubled" :
( p 106).
Pret. i-fe-dzi, var. C . . 1abittu, I1 z, " t o be destroyed" :
ti-di-ir, Tahl. I, 1. 53 (pp.
u-ta6-ba-tu,. .
D. 206, 1. 16.
lo. 186).
,
agitgu, I1 I , " t o make angry" : [azitmu], I1 2, "to heangry(?)":
Perm.ug-[g]u-ga[t],Tabl,
Inf. u-fa-az-zu-mi&, p.
206, I. 9.
I,1. 43 (p. 184).

a@n, I I , " t o take ; to undertake, to begin " : i-Eu-zu,
Tabl. IV, 1. 18 (p. 60).
I V I , " t o he taken " : inni-haz, Tahl. IV, 1. loo
(~.-70).
ahulap, interrog. adv., " how
l o n g ? " : a-@-lo$, p. zz8,
11. 46, 47, 48, 49, p. 230,
1. 50; with suffix, a-hulap-ki, p.226,11.27, 28, 29,
30 ; with Ribti, by transference of meaning, " to
cry ' It is enough ! ' " :
a-bu-Zap-ia ki-6i-ma, p.
228, 1, 45.
e t t , " t o he dark" ; Inf. " darkness" : e-tu-u, p. 234,
1. 87.
ekism, interrog. adv., "where?":
e-ki-a-am, p. 224, 11. 15,
16, 17.
akE, "hungry, ravenous " :
a-ku-u, p. z30,I. 59.
akukiitu, " whirlwind" : a.kuku-u-tum, p. 228, 1. 37.
[akilu], " t o be afflicted" :
Pres. a-ha-la, p. 146, n. 4;
p. 148, 1. zz.
akkulu, "aflicted" : uk-kulu-ti, p. 232, 1. 72.
[akitiiu], I1 r, " t o put an end
to" : Imper. uk-ki-Jc, p.
23% 1. 5 5 .
ali, interrog. adv., "where ? " :
a a h .1
6- (p.
.. lo).
- .
e l t , " high " ; fem. plur. eldti,
" t h e height; the zenith (?)" : e-la-a-h; Tabl.
V, I. I I (p. 78).

alidu, I, " t o bear."
I r , do. : Part. mu-al-lido-af, var. mu-um-nra-alli-da-at (= muwallidal),
Tahl. I, 1. 4 (p. 2).
aliku, " to go."
malaku, " going, gait" : mnlak-Ju, Tahl. IV, 1. 67
( P 66).
uliunu, " border (?)of a robe " :
ulinni-Su, p. 118, 1. 16.
amu, " reed (?)" : a-mi, p. 132 ,
1. 18; a-ma-am, p. 132,
1. '7.
[amii], " t o speak."
amitu,"speech; thing, deed":
a-ma-tu-Ju, Tabl. VII,
1. 3' ( P 98).
emt. I I , " t o be like."
111 r , " t o make like; to
create" : u:-ta-nu-u, p.
126, 1. 14; Ju-ta-mu-u,
p 125, n. 5.
Emu. "dav"
, :, i t f u Gmhvza.
"henceforth" : if-tu u mi-im-ma, Tabl. IV, I. 7
( P 58).
Emu, "tempest" : Tabl. I, 1. 123
(p. 18); Tabl. 11, 1. 29
(p. 26) ; Tabl. 111, 1. 3 j
(P. 42), 1. 91 (P. 52);
applied
to Marduk's
chariot, Tahl. IV, 1. 50
( P 64).
emGdu. IV r, "to he established;
to advance" : in-nin-duma, var. [ziz-nin-d]u u[ 1,
Tahl. I, 1. 2 1 (p. 4 ) ; innirt-du-ma, Tabl. IV, I. 93
( P 70).

imhullu, "evil wind " : tin-kul.
lu (var. la), Tabl. IV,
1. 96 (p. 70) ; im-/&-la,
Tabl. IV, 1. 45 (p. 62),
1. 98 (p. 70); im-hul-lri,
p. 206, 1. 15.
[amBlu], I1 I , intrans., " t o be
furious" : Part. nu-ummil-turn, p. 228, 1. 38.
ammatu, "the sure earth" :
Tabl. I. 1. 2 (p. 2).
unkennu, " might, strength,
forces" : unken-nu, Tabl.
I I. I
(p 6
Tabl.
11, I. 18 (p. 24); Tabl.
111, 1. Z Z (p. 40), 1. 80
(p. 50) ; un - ki- en - nu,
Tabl. 111, 1. 80 (var., p.
50, n. 5).
[esEhu], " t o despair" : Pres.
is-sibu, p. 146, n. 4 ; p.
148, 1. 22; fe-si-ib-Eu,
var. fe-i!'(sic)-si-ib-ku, p.
152, 1. 16.
asurakku,"bedofariver; depth":
a.sur-rak-ka, p. 206, 1. 19.
apu, "swamp": &pa, p. 134,
I. 32; a-ju-um-mu, p. 134,
1. 27.
appuuu, "huge" : [alp-pu-nua-fa, Tabl. I, 1. 126 (var.,
p. 18).
appunama, adv., "of huge
size": up-pu-nu-ma,Tabl.
I, I 126 (p. 18) ; Tabl.
11, I. 32 (p. 26); Tabl.
111. 1. 94 (var., p. 52) ;
up-pu-un- nu-ma, Tabl.
111, 1. 36 (P. 421, 1. 94
(P. 52).

epeku, I1 I , " t o cause to rage" :
~.b-pU-klL,p. 230, 1. 62.
apparu, "marsh " : aj-pa-< p.
'34, 11. 25. 27.
uoiHu.. "bewitchment" : u-bi-fa.
,
.
P. 230, 1. 55.
apu, I I , " t o go out"; I11 I ,
"to cause to go out ; to
take oneself off, to take
to flight" : u-s'e-su-ma,
Tabl. IV, 1. log (p. 72).
ispimtu, 'Lbone": i!-~i-in2-[tu]?,~,
Tabl. VI, I. 5 (p. 86).
esepu, " t o add t o ; to bring
upon" : Pret. e-sip, p. 148,
1. 24.
ukti : u-ku-u, p. 160.
11 2 , " t o pay homage, to
worship" : u-fak-fin-u,
Tabl. VII, 1. 4 (p. 92);
u-fukku, p. z24, I. 14.
akrab-amklu, ' I scorpion-man" :
Tabl. I, I. 1 2 2 (p. 1 8 ) ;
Tabl. 11, 1. 28 (p. 26);
Tabl. 111, 1. 32 (p. 42).
1. 90 (P. 50).
'Bru, Sru, " to set out, to set out
against, to attack": '-ir,
Tabl. 111, 1. 55 (p. 46),
1. 1 I 3 (p. 54) ; fa-ar-ha,
Tabl. 11, I. 1 2 2 (p. 34).
arsku, I I , " t o be long, to
endure" : [li-112-ik, Tabl.
VII,l.11q(var.,p.108f.).
I1 I , " t o lengthen; to be
long" : u r - ri- ku, varr.
u-ur-ri-ku, u-ri-ki, Tabl.
I, 1. 13 ( p 4 ) ; [uj-ri-kuma, Tabl. 11, I. 7 (p. 22).
urriij, adv., " by day" : [t~r-r]d,
Tabl. I, 1. 50 (p. lo).

.

255

GLOSSARY.
" devil " : gal-li-e,
var.
gall;", Tabl. IV, 1. r 16
( P 72):
gisgallu, " station " : gi-k-galla-fa, Tabl. V , 1. 83 (p.
84).
gipiru, "field (?)," or possibly
a kind of tree : gi-pa-ra,
var. gi-$ar-ra, Tabl. I ,
1. 6 (p. 2).
g a i i r u , I I , " t o strengthen."
I1 I , " t o make very strong":
Perm. gu-ui-Jur, Tabl. 1,
1. 19 (P. 4).
magBaru, "might " : Tabl. I ,
I' '4' (p' ");
'I3
1. 48 (p. 2 8 ) ; Tabl. 111,
1. 5 2 ( P 44)r 1. 1x0 (p.
54).

gdlt,

d u l l ~"
, service (of the gods) " :
dul-lu, Tabl. VI, I. 8 (p.
88).

danninu, " firmness ; the firm
earth ?' : don - n i - nu =
ir$i!im(!im), p. 168 ; danni-nu, Tabl. VII, I. r 15
(p. 108).
dupgimtu, pl. du$s*imriti, " t h e
Tablets of Destiny" :
Tab). I. 1. 137 (p. 20);
Tabl. 11, 1. 43 (p. 28);
Tabl. 111, 1. 47 (p. 44),
1. ros (p. 52); Tabl. IV,
1. 1 2 1 (p. 74): p. 209,
1. 4.
durmabu, "ruler (?)" : dUr.rnnhi, p. 104 (Tabl. VII) ;
dur-ma-&, p. 165.
jda8ii.1, I1 I , " t o cause to be
fruitful": lid-di$-&-a, var.
l i - id- [ d i ] - e f - f a - a , Tabl.
VII, 1. 130 (p. 112).
'I
111'I, ' I to cause to abound
in, to clothe with" : Pret.
dabru, "mighty (?)" : Tabl. I.
ui-dai-la-a, Tabl. I, 1. 1 1 8
I . 1 2 3 ( p 1 8 ) ; Tabl. 11,
1. zg (p. 26); Tabl. 111,
(p. 16); Tahl. 11, 1. 24
(p. 24) ; Tabl. 111, I. 28
1. 33 (P. 42)s 1.9' (P. 5 2 ) .
( P 42), 1. 86 (p. so).
dilu, " t o move about ; to scout;
to
round, to watch dittu, udittu, " rush" : di-il-la,
from hiding": Pret. i-dulP '34, 1. 25.
lu, Tabl. I, I. 57 (p. 186) ;
i-du-ul-[li], Tabl. I, 1. 89
7
(p. 12) ; / a - d u - u l - Z [ i ] ,
Tabl. I, 1. 99 (p. 14); zazitru: i-aanz-l-u-&, p. 134,
i-dul-lu-s'u, Tabl. IV, 1.
1. 30.
63 f. (pp. 66, 186 f.).
zakiru, I I , ' L to he high."
I 1 I , "to exalt" : u-znk-&[adalibu, 111 I , " t o trouble" :
Perm. 6u-ud-lu-6u, p. 228,
YU-bu], Tabl. VI, I. 146
(P. 90).
1. 49.

zakiku. "tempest " : za-hi-ku,
Tabl. I, 1. 104 (p. 14).
[z*u],
Pret. izir, " t o hate, to
conceive a hatred for " :
Tabl. 11. 1. I I (D. 22):
,,
Tabl. 111, 1. I j (p. +a),
1. 73 ( P 48).
[zarbabu], IV I , " t o .fume, to
rage" : Perm. na-aar-bubu, Tabl. I, I. rr I (p.
16); Tabl. IS, 1. 1 7 ( p 24);
Tabl. 111, I. 21 (p. 40),
1. 79 ( P 50).

I V I , do. (?): Zzlih-bar-miin, Tabl. 11, I . z j (p. 24);
Tabl. 111, 1. 87 (p. so).

\.

$ibu,"tobesound, tobehealed":
Pres. i-te-d-bi, p. 2 2 8 ,
I. 40.
tubtu, "joy": plur. tu-u6-ba-a11; Tabl. II,l. r I j (p. 32).

3
b a b e u , " t o be filled, to be
bloated (?)" : Perm. haha-su, Tabl. 111, I. 1 3 6
( P 56).
baliku, 111 I , " t o destroy" :
Pres. (not as Prec.) nuus'-@-la@ (=nrrfabla),
Tabl. I, 1. 45 (p. 185).
hamii, " to destroy (?)" : hamu-u, p. 206, 1. 2 I .
basisu, " t o think, to know " :
Part. ha-sis, Tabl. I, 1. 18
( P 4), 1. 60 (P. 12).
?lip& 12, " t o shatter, to burst" :
ib-fe-pi, Tabl. IV, 1. 101
( P 70).
biku, ' I to mingle together,"
intrans. : Pret. i-hi-$u-uma, Tabl. I, 1. 5 (p. 2).
[barmamul, I11 I , " t o destroy,
to overcome(?)": (&barm i - h , Tabl. I, 1. 119 (p.
16): Tabl. 111, I. 29 (p.
4".

kabitu, I1 I , " t o make weighty;
to oppress" : u-kab-bi[t]ma, Tabl. 11, 1. I (p. 22);
kub-6u-tu-ma, Tabl. VI,
1. 1 0 (p. 88).
kabittu, " midst (?)" : ka-bift i - b m a , Tabl. V, 1. I I
( P 78).
k u b u t t t , " abundance" : kubu-uf-te-e, Tabl. VII, 1. z I
(p. 96); p. 161.
kilu, I1 I , "to uphold, to hold,
tobriug": Zi-ki-iZ-Zu,Tabl.
VII, 1. I I O (p. 108); mukil, Tabl. VI1,l. 19 (p. 96).
kalfi, I1 I , "tomake an end of":
u-kaZ-Za-an-ni,p.z3z,1.7q.

I1 2, " t o cease (?) " : (?)ukfa-li (var. Zu), Tabl. VII,
1. 114 (p. 108).
[kalimu], 11 r , I' to inform."
taklimtu,"instruction": ta[k]i
,1
I
I. 137
( P "4).

z57

GLOSSARY.

[kalmii], I V

I , " to loo$ with
anger upon,to persecute":
Perm. 112-hii-mu-u-irz-ni7zn, p. 230, 1. 56.
kamE, I V I, " to be taken
captive" : Fret. ih - irn n r u ~ uTabl.
,
I, I. 98 (p. 14).
kamiru, I 2, Inf. hilnztzn~.
' I battle" : Tabl. I , I. ~ q z
(p. 0
Tabl. 11. 1. 48
(p. 2 8 ) ; Tabl. 111, I. 52
(p. 44), 1. I 1 0 (p. 54).
kamiru, " snare."
kamirii, "in the snare":
ha-,na-ri<, Tabl. IV, I. r I z
(P72).
kani, I1 I , " t o tend carefully!'
taknitu, "fostering care, true
worship "' : iuh-z<z-a-Li,
p. 7.06, I. 14.
kiniinu, " brazier " : hi-nu-%;,
p. 234, 1. 87.
kisukku, " bondage."
ltisukkii; " i n bondage " :
hi-~~B-kz.F.
~.Tabl. IV. I. I la
( P 72).
kusarieu, "ram " : Tabl. I,
1. 123 (p. 1 8 ) ; Tahl. 11,
1. z 9 (P. ~ 6 ; )'I'ahl. 111,
1. 3 3 (P. 42)) 1 . 9 ' (P. 52).
kupu, "trunk ( ? ) " : s'zi, iiu-pu,
Tabl. IV, I. 136 (p. 76).
kipdu, " plan" : [iii!p-di-;u-nu,
Tabl. V I I , I. 44 (p. roo).
kirimmu, "love " : ki-rin-ia,
p. 232, 1. 83.
karru, " costly raiment (?)" :
Tabl. I, I. 13z (p. ZO);
'
Tabl. 11, 1. 38 (p. 26) ;
Tabl. 111, 1. 4: (p. 44))
I. loo (p. 52).

kaGaiu, " t o collect (?)" : Pret.
iir-En-Yu-ni,l~-nza, Tabl.
111, I. J 29 (p. 56).
katimu, 111 I , " t o overcome" :
Perm. - l'abl.
119 119 ( P 32).

5
[li't], "to be strong; to be able."
la'itu, " full extent" : a-nn
In-'-a-ti-sa(var, A%), Tabl.
I v , 1. 97 (P. 70).
[labibu], " t o rage " : Tabl. 11,
1. I 2 (p. ZZ),1. 17 (P. 24);
Tabl. II1,ll. 16, zr (p.40),
1. 74 (P. 48)rI. 79 (P. 50) ;
p. 2 2 6 , I. 3 1 .
labbu, "lion, lioness": la-ahbu, p. 230 (1. 51).
labbu,"dragon": lab-6i,p.1 18,
11.17,20,24; p.IZO,11.7,
9 ; lab-ha, p. rzo, I. 4.
labinu, leb&nu, " t o abase " :
Inf. Zi-hierz, p. 234, 1. 91.
luddn, a weapon : Zu-ud-di,
p. 146, 1. 17.
lalfi, I I , " t o be lull."
I1 I , " t o malie full " :
Perm. lul-liz-a, Tabl. IV,
1. 72 (p. 66).
lillu, "demon " : Zil-lu, p. 230,
1. 59.
lam% " t o surround."
limitu, "circumferellce, circuit": pl.li nza-a-ii,p. I 18,
I. lo.
17

260

GLOSSARY.

nasiku, " t o place; to place the
hand upon, t o grasp, t o
seize,": ir-suk. Tabl. lV,
1. I O I (p. 7 0 ) ; is-su-knmnza, p. I 18, 1. 7 ; us-Rawnza, p. I 18, 1. 4.
nas8su, 11
njsIat,r,
' g to
nou urn bitterly" : u-naas-sa-su, p. 228, 1. 49.
nassu, "sorrowf~~I,grievous,
lamenting " : na-as-s< p.
228, I. 46 ; na-as-sa-a-/i,
p. 228, 1. 48.

,,

nissatu,

' L mourning, lamentation" : nissaii", p. 228,
1. 49.
napihu, 'I Lo flame o u t ; to roar
against (of a w i n d ) " :
nap-hat, p. 228, 1. 37.

nipru, "offspring, child " : xiLjn-n.iu,~ ~ b 11,
l , 1,
( P 22).

naritu, " t o become weak, to
falter" : i-nar-ru-!z!, p.
2 2 6 , I. 2 1 .
naiii, 1V I , " t o be raised on

high " : Perm. n u - a d e - a at, p. 2 2 8 , I. 34.
naBaku,III I , "to remove from ":
zl - &I-as- s i - iir!(var. k n ) ,
Tabl. VII, 1. 28 (p. 96).
naiiku, I I , "to liiss": [i].l-li-ie,
Tabl. 11, 1. I 16 (p. 34).
1 2 , do. : if-fa-5~2,?'abl. V ,
1. 79 ( P 82).
1V I , "to kiss one another" :
Pret. in-m:;-&~,Tabl. 111,
I. 1 3 2 (p. 56).
naiiku, 11 I , " t o give way
beneath ( ? ) " : [u]~,ra-ieEu,varr. z~-ria-a~-;n[b
. . 1,
21 na-fa&,
Tabl.l,l. gg (pp.
r o , 186).
naiBru, " t o diminish": Perm.
na-ii-i~;Tabl.I,1.25(p.6).

napiiu, I1 I , " t o makr broad,
to make merciful" : Part.
n~u-nap-ji-.i2l, Tabl. 11,
I. I I O (p. 32).

nisirtu, "treasure" ; crnploycd
as srnongm for " life" :
ni-p'r-ta~lu,
var. nn pi; tai u , Tabl. VII, I. I l r (p.
108).

niku, I I , " t o lament."
IIIz,"tocauselamentation":
mul-/a-,zu-&a-a-t1; p. zz4,
I. 9.
nake, 112, " t o be poured out" :
Pres. uf-tak-kn (?), Tabl.
11, 1. 130 (p. 36)

a
sagii, " t o want, lack, need

":

p, 160; sa."
~ L - S U - , I E L ,Tabl. IV, I. lz
."
(p. 58) ; .sa-gi-su-nt~-n2a,
Tabl. VII, 1. ro (p. 94);
sa-,ni-c-a, p. 232, 1. 75.
[silpi], "to cease": Perm. sil,a/i, T;ibl. IV, I. 6 8 (p. 66).
sakipu, " to lie d o w n , to rest " :
Part. sn-ki-ju, Tabl. I,
1. I l a (p, 161, Tabl. 11,
I. 16 (p. z4), Tabl. I l l ,
1. 2 0 (P. 401, 1. 78 (P. 50) ;
Perm. snk-ju, l'abl. I,
1. 33 (P. 6).
Inf,

sn-,nu-ti,

[salii], I1 I : " to pray, t o sup-

palisu, " to pay homage t o (?)":
pal-sz~[ . . 1, Tabl. V I I ,
plicate" : Inf. su-lu-u-a,
I. 107 (p. 106) ; pa-la-st',
P. 2349 1. 99.
p. 167.
sinniztu, " female, \r.ornan2':
$ j - in.*;- la. funr,
var. [pahii], I V I : ni-pzl~szr-u,p. 148,
1. 4.
si-in-niia-at, Tabl. 11,
[palsa@u], 111 I , " t o crush":
1. 1 2 2 (p. 34).
Imper.
.
iu-pal-si-&<p.z j q ,
[sap%], I1 I , " t o pray " : Inf.
I . 98.
su-pu-u-a, p. "4, 1. 99.
sap&&
I 1 I , " t o make of n o [paltt], I V I , " t o snccumb, t o
be defeated (?)" : 7)-paleffect, t o cast down" :
fu-u,
Tabl. IV, I. 16
Prec. lu-sap-pi-ie, Tabl. I,
(
P
58).
1. 39 (P. 84).
pusummu, " bond (i)": pu-susaparu, " net."
u??~-nze,
p. 126, 1. 3 3 .
saparig, "in t h e net" : sa-pa- pisannu, " treasure - chest " :
& , T a b l . I V , l . ~ ~ (p.72).
z
pi-sn-an-lza-ti-ha, p. 154.
supuru, fold" : su-pu-7-i, p .
1. 22.
..
234, 1. 90.
[piku], I 1 I , " t o give heed to " :
sarsru, "to oppose,to resist(?)":
u-pa-ka, p. 23% I. 79.
sa-m-ar, Tahl. IV, 1. 9 [parsadu], I V I , ' ( t o escape" :
na-par-lu-dil (var. d i - i f ) ,
( P 58).
sarru, f. plnr. sarriiii, " reTabl. IV, 1. I I O (p. 72)).
bellion" : s a r - r a - a - t i , pa&hu, 111 I , " t o pacify";
Perm. " t o rest" : &-u$Tabl. IV, 1. 72 (p. 66).
lu-$-ah (var. ku), Tabl. I ,
1. 38 (p. 8 ) ; s'rrp-Iu-ha-nl,
Tabl. I, 1. 50 (p. lo).
[peB6ku], " t o be in trouble":
Pret. z>-Be-ih, p. 232, I. 68.
pagru, "body " ; pa-ag-r;, " my paiiru, I z, t o divulge (?) " :
body, myself," p. 146 f.,
ip-fa-Tar (?): Tabl. 11,
n. 4 ; cf. also p a h .
1. 4 (p. 22).
palii, symbol
of
royalty, plltu, " f r o n t ; person" : puu t ~ i mp.
, 154,l. 25; paf-7.1'
"ring(?)": pn/Z(a), Tabl.
u pu-CL-ti (var. $ Z L - f i ) ,
IV, I. 29 (p. 60).
" my own person,
my[pelu], 111'' z, "to alter, annul":
self,"p.1qo,1.8,p.rq8,I.z.
ul-it-pi-;/, var. uf-it-pi-elI[u], Tahl. V11, 1. 132 pitku, " handiworlt " : pi-li $-.FII,
Tabl. 11, 1 . 1 (p. 7.2).
(p. I 12).
~

marsh " : :u-$a-a, var.
Tabl. I, 1. 6 (p. 2).
[ s i r u ?], I1 I , " t o cover (?)" :
u-sir, Tabl. V , 1. 1 4
(P 78).
siriS, " u n t o " : i - r z - i ; , var.
:ri-rii",'Tal~l.I, 1. 32 (p. 6) ;
Si-~-i-r;,Tabl. IV, I. 128
(P. 74).
girma~~,~lor.:~i~~~~n~Z,"monsterserpcnt" : Tabl. I, 1. 114
(p. 1 6 ) ; 'I'abl. 11, 1. zo
(P 2 4 ) ; Tabl. 111, 1. 24
(P. 401, 1. 8 2 (pi 50).
sirritu, "sceptre " : s i ~ + ~ ip.t ,
226, 1- 32.
sirru$;u, .'dingon " : Talil. I,
1. 1 2 1 (p. 1 8 ) ; Tabl. 11,
1. 2 j (p. 24) ; Tabl. 111,
1. 31 (P. 4z), 1. 89 (P. 50).
"

Y

szr-sn-',

sabitu, I I , I' t o take."
1 2 . Inf. / Z : ! ~ U /"Zt L
o , begin":
Tabl. I , 1. 130 (p. 1 8 ) ;
Tabl. 11, 1. 36 (p. 2 6 ) ;
l ' a b l . 111, I. 40 (p. p ) ,
1. 98 (p. 52).
I V I , " t o b e held fast, to
be heldin remembrance":
ii-i--:ah-iu-ma, var. [ii-elsa-a6-tu, Tabl. V I I , 1. 125
( p 110).
[iabiru, I z, ' I to attain (?)," o r
"to understand(?)": Inf.
fi-i;-bz~-yu,Tabl. 111, 1. 5
( P 38).
111 I. "to impartto, t o make
known t o " : Pret. u-!aa.F-8i-ra-az.7zi, Tabl. 111,
1. 14 (p. 40)s 1. 72 (P. 48) ;
u-Sa-a<-bLi-a7~-7zi,Tabl.
111, 1. 72 (var., p. 48 f.).
[ialilu, " t o lie down, t o lie
down t o rest" : Fret. kablu, " midst, inward parts" :
&a6- l t ~
- t~: T i - a -771a-/i,
ni-it-/al, Tabl. I, 1. qo
Tabl. IV, 1. 65 (p. 66).
(p. a), 1.46 (butcf. p. 185).
11. roo. 1 0 % (p. 14) ; Pres. kudmib, " before" : / ? I L - z I ~ - ~ ~ L ~ ni-{a-nl-/a/, Tabl. I , 1. 96
if, var. bud-meJ, Tabl. I ,
(p. 14); Perm. sai-/a-[at!.
1. 3 3 (P. 6).
Tabl. 1, 1. 50 (P. 10) ; kudduiu, "pure, holy" : !nilqa-nl-la-hu, Tahl. I, 1. 38
dl'-;zc, p. 226, !. 28.
(P. '84).
k i p u , I z , " t o entrust to " :
aallBtu, "plague " : ~ a l - i : ~ - t z ~ n ~ ,
k i z Tabl. V , 1. I Z
p. 206, 1. 2 I .
(P. 78).
[kaqibu], I11 2 : Imper. Yz~-/n!l@imru; " fulnessM: ;i- in2 - 7.i,
i-iin-ni,2-oin, Tabl. V, I.za
Tabl. V I I , 1. 2 1 (p. 96) ;
si-im-nr, p. 161.
(p So).

iJ

r8Su-arkit, " the Beginning and

I. ~ z (p.
o r6) ; Tabl. 111,
the Future " : ~-E:n-n~hiit,
1. 30 (p. 42), 1. 88 (P. 5 0 ) ;
'I'abl. VII, 1. 107 (p. 106) ;
lii-ta~-bi-iEn-n~~z
(oar.iirrm)ri-e-ic~ar-hat,p. 167 ; cf.
nia, Tabl. 11, I. 26 (p. 24).
also !a ijza 7.i-e-;i 76 ar-ha- Bubarruru, " t o be alflicted " :
Pret. u;-ka-ri-2l-,1~a,Tahl.
[ t i . . p. 178, 1. 19.
11, I. 6 (p. 2 2 ) ; Perm.
h
- hi-hnl--f-u.
w
mi,
p.
232,
I.
75.
%'u, ' I to take wing, to fly " :
iabitu,
I
I , " t o rage."
i - b - ' , p. z 30, 1. 63.
111 r , " t o cause to rage, to
de'fi, " t o seek, to look f o r ; to
stir up " : u-Ia-n;-1,i-i/,
perceive, to behold " :
p. 1 2 0 , I. 5 ; Iu-u;-IIi-LL,
1-re ' - a , Tabl. I, 1. 6 0
p. 1 2 0 , 1. z.
(p. I Z ) , Tabl. IV, I. 66
(p. 66) ; < - f e - ' - n ~ ~ z - m a ,iiklu, "sense (?) " : ;i-ih-ln-iu,
p. 140, 1. 7.
l'ahl. 11, I. 81 (p. j o ) ; tele-'-e-ma, var. te-e!-[ . . . 1, iikkatu, " supremacy, control " ;
nr6-;~kknti;"cliiel" ; 7 ~ 6 Tabl. IV, 1. 83 (p. 68);
;L;llit~iaii~, " chieftain Perm. &-' (= !t'i), Tabl. I ,
h i ' : Tabl. I, 1. I j I
1. 6 (p. 2).
(p. 20); Tabl. 11, 1. 37
Ha'ilu, I I , " to ask."
(p. 26); Yabl. 111, I. 41
I1 I , " t o demand, to cry
(p. 4":. 1. 99 (p. 5").
out for" : u-;a-'-iu, var.
IL-;a-'-a-izr,Tabl. IV, I. gz Sakinu, " t o set : to provide."
Sukuttu, ' L p r o v i s i o ~:~du-htt"
(P 70).
U S - S I L Tabl.
,
V11, I. 8
BabCi, I z , " to overwhelm " :
i-sn-am-6u-', p. 206, I. 17.
( P 92).
BabiBu, " t o turn, to pervert (?)" : Sakiru, " to drink " ; Perm. " to
:ah-Su, p. 1 4 0 , 1. 7.
b e drunk (?) " : ?i-iA-7.1~
[Sudu], con. st. itid, " height,
(poss, subs., "carouse"),
supremacy"; s'udiam!ari,
'I'abl. 111, 1. 136 (p. 56).
" command in battlc " :
Halummatu, " glory, pride " :
Tabl. I, I. I j r (p. 2 0 ) ;
!a-!urn-ma/, p. 148, 1. j.
Tabl. 11, I. j7 (p. 26) ; s'aliku, " t o cut out, to cut off."
Sulluktu, " cutting o& deb
I , 1. 4 (p. 42),
I. 99 (p. j2)..
struction": ;z~l-lzi-uil-f1;
Badidu, " to drag " : Pres. Cs'adp. 228, 1. 37 ; p. z j z , 1. 69.
dn-[ad], p. 118, 1. rz.
iumu, " nalnc," plur. ; r ~ o z E : SU[babidu], I z, " t o rear u p " :
mi-t-!ii, Tahl. T'II, I. 1z4
ilS-ln/7-$i-dn7,i-nm, Tahl. I,
(var., p. r lo).

. 1,

265

GLOSSARY.

~~

-

I , " to hear."
a , " the whirlwind " ;
1n7.a la Smziiz, " t h e wind
I V I , " to be heard " :
(?)lir-s'i-ma (or na;:, I I ;
which had no equal,"
cf. var. fr. ~zini,p. 109,
Tabl. IV, I. 46 (p. 62).
n. r j), Tabl. VII, 1. I r q [Siru], " to oppose (?)" : Part.
( p 108).
la-'-zi=ru, p. 206, I. 1 1 .
iamiru, Iz, " t o rage": L-tan- iertu, "pr~nishment": it-rii-su,
m n - n ~p.
, 230, 1. 58.
Tabl. 1V, I. I 14 (p. 7 2 ) .
Sumurratu, "confusion, rase, iarbabu, "terror (?) " : :ac*nr;iinanger " : iu-mur-m-lrr,
bn, l'abl. I, I. r 19 (p. 16) ;
Tabl. VII, I. qz (p. l o o ) .
Tabl. !II, I. z q (p. 42).
Sitmurig, " \vildly" : ;if-n~u-f-li
I. 87 (p. 5 0 ) ; far-ha-bi-2;'
(var. n't:), Tabl. IV, I. 89
(probably with pron. suff.,
not adv.), Tabl. 11, I. z j
( P 70).
iani, " to repeat" ; Inf. ;an%,
( P "4)
"version" : ; [ a ] - ? ~ [ i ] . [ e ] , iariku, "to present, to furnish":
p. 126, I. 8.
I$-rd-[Air], p. 1 ~ 8 I., 5 ;
iiauinu, "to rival."
iY-rz~-z~h-ku,
p. I Z ~ 11.
, j ;
iinnatu, "rivalry" :sin-na-asi : - ~ . u - k u - ~ z i k - k i ~ , ~p.- ~ ~ ~ n ,
su,.p. 206, I. 1 2 .
128, 1. 7.
iasi, I z , " to cry" : il-fa-st', iartiru, " l i g h t " : Ya-1-u-u,; p.
Tabl. I, 1. 42 (p. 8).
228, 1. 35.
gipru, " business, occupation " : SuriSam, adv. (?) : ;u - rt'- ;am,
Tabl. IV, 1. 1 2 4 (p. 74).
i~-pir,p. 152, I. 19.
gukammumu, " t o roar " : perm. iaimu, "battle, fight."
[ S t ~ 1 - p a - a m - t ~ ~ z ~ - n z [ a ] - a [ / ] ,ia3me8, " t o the fight " : FaUS-me:, Tabl. IV, 1. g +
'Tabl. I , 1. 26 (p. 6).

;em%, I

.

"

-.

.
..

."

,

.

L.

.. .... .....A

....

var. [&I-tu-unr-me:,
Tabl. I , I. j8 (pp. 10,186);
Sa-kt'-urn-nzi-2;. Tabl. 11.
1. 6 (p. 2 2 ) .
gakOu, " t o destroy."
Sakiu, " violent, unruly " :
Sob-in, p. z z b , 1. 26.
iiru, " wind " :
nha'i, "the
fourfold wind" ; Gr. s d i
(var. V I I - h i - hi), " t h e
sevenfold wind " ; :iWu
IJ,

lum-mu, p.

226,

I. 28.

n
tabinu, "power, might"

:

fa-hi-

ni, p. 232, 1. 78.

" enclosing wall " :
tub-!a-a-fi, p. 154, 1. 24.
takizu, "battle."
tabizii, " to the battle " : /aba-zi-zi, Tabl. IV, I . gq
(P. 70).
tubuktu,

IV.
Jnbe,r fo n ~ m e eof Beitiee, fjthni, @f~cee,cfe.
Angar, god : An-iar, Tabl. I, 11.
12, I 5 (p. 4 f.) ; Tabl. 11, 11.
8, 9 (P. 2 2 f.), 1.49 (P. 28 f.),
I. 72 ( p 30, restore AIL-far),
1. 79 (p. 30f.h 11. 83, 114,
115(p. 32 f.), 1. 119(p. 34f.);
l'ahl. 111, 1. I (p. 38 f.),
1.13(~4Of.),1.7I(p.+8f.),
I. 131 (p. 56 f.); Tahl. IV,
1. "5 (p. 7 4 f . l ; p. 195;
p. 198, I. 30, 1. 15 (Rev.);
p. 19q, I. 2 3 ; ='Aoowpdr,
see Introduction.
Anu, god : i b ' A - ~ ~ uTabl.
,
I,
I. 1 4 (p. 4 f . ) ; 'h'A-num,
Tabl. I, 1. 14 (var., p. 5),
147,note,I,zo;"'~"AkkndC~~ 11. 15, 16 (p. qf.), 1. 85
(p. ~ z f . ) ;Tabl. 11, I. 81
p. 212, I. 26; siri'Ailfadiu,
[p. 3 o f . ) ; Tab). 111, 1. 53
p. 2 1 I , 1. 18; si-ridk-ka-di-i,
(var., p. 46) ; Tabl. IV,
p. 147, note, I. 16.
11. 4, 6 (p. 58 f.), . 1. 146
Akrabu,Scorpio: A+~-ahu,p.z13,
(p. 76f.) ; Tabl. V, I. 8
11. 6, 13, 14.
( ~ d r for
. ""E-U, R. 13,774,
Alim-nuns, possibly shorter form
p. rgof.), 1. 78 (p. Szf.),
of Asaru-ali!n-nu7ta, title of
P. 126, 1. 8, p. 224, I. 1 8 ;
Mardulr : [ . . . A]LIAT-NUNiiir
A-nu-unz, l'abl. I , I. 16
NA, p. 2 16.
(var., p. 5 ) ; 'I'abl. 111, 1. 53
Almanu, deity: "'dl-ma-nu,
(p. 46 f.), I. I I I (p. 54 f.) ;
p. 218, I. 10.
""A-ni111, l'abl. IV, 1. 44.
Ana, the god Anu: AN-NA,p.
(p. 62 f.) ; Tabl. VII, I . 6
124, I. I ; p. 126, I. 6 ; see
(p. gz f.) ; [""
A]
- nnnz,
also Anu.
l'abl. 11, betwecn 11. 85
and 104. (I<. 10,008, p. 190) ;
Anbanini, mythical king: An-bani-ni, p. 142, I . 18.
""Afzu,p. 216, 1. 2 , p . 218,

Adad, god : "'Adad, p. 198,l. 5.
Adu-nuna, title of Marduk :
u"A-du-ntrn-na, Tabl. VII
(K. 8,519 and comm. I<.
4,406, Rev., col. ii, 1. 23),
pp. 104f., 166; p. 173.1. 20;
p. 178, I. 21.
Aga-azag, title of Mardok :
om AKa-bzag, Tabl. VII, I. 25
(P. 96 f.).
Agi[l . . . 1, title of Marduk :
""A-gi[l . . . 1, Tabl. V I I
(I<. 13,761), p. ~ O f.;
Z
sar.
'"'GIL[ 1, p. 163.
Akkadii, Alckad : Ak-in-di-i, p.

INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC.

269

Gugu, title of 1VIarduk : '"'Gzb-gn,
Enzu, Sin : ( D I N G I ~EN-zu-NA,
)
p. 1-26, I. 3.
p. 173, 1. 2 2 .
Enzu, star : Et'lzziL,p. 213, 11. 6, Gutira, goddess ; identified with

,

Ktar: "" Gu-lir-a, p. 224,
7, 6 ; AmhAnbw Eneu, p. 213,
I. l Z .
1. 9.
HanBi,
title of Mnrduli: F u n id^, city :
=e~aEridl,,
{Z"~"", var. fZa --a - $a - a ,
p. 130, 1. 8 ; p. 132, 1. 12.
Tabl. V I I , 1. 123 (p. I I O f.);
E-sagil, temple of Marduk at
""tlnniil, p. 178, 1. zz.
Babylon: E - s q - g i l , 'I'abl.V,
Hubur,
title: fJu-burpal-ha-li,
1. b g (p. 82 f.); E-sag--iin,
p.
197,
1. 9.
p. ,236, I. r r 3 ; E-SAG-IL-I.A,
Idigna, Tigris : (ID)IDIGNA,p.
p. 132, I. I Z ; [E-SAG-IL~A,
134, 1. 23.
p. 132, I . 13 ; E-SAG-IL-LA=
Igigi,
the spirits of heaven:
E-sag-ila, p. 132, I. 14.
b'Igi, I
. 111, 1. 1 z 6
E-Bara, heaven : E-Say-fa, Tahl.
(p. 5 6 f . ) ; Tabl. VII (p.
1v, II. 144, 145 (P. 7 6 f.) i
of.); p. 206, 1. 23,p. 222,
p. , q q , I. 25 ; npIl E-!ar-?a.
1. 3, p. zz6, II. 19, 31.
titleof Marduk P. ~ 0 6 ~18.
1.
~
~goddess;
i identified
~
~ ,r.ith ,
E-Udlam, temple of Nergal in
Iztar : "'Zr-ni-ni, p. zzz,
Cuthah : EGid-/am, p. 152,
I. 3 ; p. 230, 1. 51 ; p. 236,
1. 1 2 .
I. 105.
E-zida, temple of Nabti at Bar- Igtar, goddess : " ' I ~ f n p.
~ ;138,
sippa: E - 21-DA, p. 138,
I. I 3 f., p 228, 1. 38, p. 234,
I. 13 ; (?) E-zi-du, p. 213,
1. 3. p 236, 11. 109, 111;
1. .I.
'"'A?lar; p. 144, 1. l o , p. 150,
Gaga, god: "" G a - ~ aTabl.
,
111,
1. Z Z , p. Z Z Z , 1. 2 , p. 228,
Il.z,3,11 (p38f.),1.67
1. 34, p. 236, 1. 106.
I?u-arik. " Long-wood," ouc of
( P 48 f.).
the names of Marduk's bow :
Gibil, god : "' Gihil, Tabl. I ,
i!-111a-rip, Tabl. V, I. 81
1. 141 (p. 20f.); Tahl. 11,
(p. 82 f.); isz~ a-rilz, p. 177,
I. 47 (p. 28 f.); Tabl. 111,
1 . 4 ; GI;-GID-DA,p. 177~1.5.
1. 51 ( p 44f.), I. 109
Kaksidi, Icalikab - me;rC, star :
(P. 54f.).
Gil[ 1, title of Marduk; see
ICAIC-SI-111,p. 214, I. 19.
Agiil . . . 1.
Karrad iliui, title of MarduL :
kar-rod il21;i*', p. 206, I. I 8.
Giskul, title of Marduk : " GI!kul, Tabl. V1I (I<. 13, 761). KaStu, star : *"*""*" KoJfu (one
p. 1 0 2 f.
of the names of Marduli's
bow),Tabl.V,l.8z(p. 82f.).
Gud, Mars: Gud, p. 213, 1. 14.

2?0

INIIEX TO DEITIES, ETC

Kingu, god : '"Kijz-g~~
Tabl. I ,
T a b l V I I (I<. 1 3 , 7 6 1 ) ~
1.1~8(p.18f.),l.13g(p.~of.);
p. roz f.
Tdbl. 1181. 34 (P. 26 f.), 1.45 Lugal-dul(or du)-azaga, title of
(p. 28 f.), I. 56 (p. 30 f.),
hInrdu%: ""Lugiil-iitll-nzofbetween 11. 85 and 104 (p.
ga, T;t!>l. V I I (I<. 8,5r9),
190); Tab). 111, 1. 38 (p.
p. rob f. ; (DINGII<)LUCAT.IIDL-AZAG-GA= " ' L u ~ ( i 2 - d f ~ ~ 42 f.), 1. 49 (P. 44f.1, 1. 96
nzn: - &,a, p. r 32, I. I 3 ;
( P 5 d . h 1. 107 (P. 54 f.),;
Tabl. IV, I. 66 (p. 6o f.),
""LUGAL- D U L - AZAG - GA,
I. 81 ( p 6 8 f.), 1. I 1g(p.7+f.),
p. zza, n. I .
P. zo9, li. z, 4, P. z r 3 . 3, Lugal-durmah, title o f Marduk:
p. 218, 11. 8, 9 ; '"'Tin-gi,
~ ' a g L t ~ g n i - i i L r r -Tabl.
v ~ n ~V1I
,
p. 213, 11. 5 , 9 ;
I<i]~i,b(K. 8,519, and comm.
bw,Tabl.I,l. 136 ( v a r . , p . z ~ ) .
I<. 4,406, Rev., cal. ii,
KiBar, deity: X-Iar. Tabl. I ,
I. 8), pp. roqf., 16j.
l z (p. 4 f . ) ; = K'oo=Pjs
.Lugal-en-ankia, title orfiTarduk:
see Introduction.
s z " L ~ ~ ~ ~ - p.~I 73,
~ - ~ ~ - ~ < ~ - ~ ,
Kuta, Cuthah: KulGK{ p. 152,
I.
19.
I. 1 2 .
Lu-I~ULahamu, ( I ) deity: ibzZa-~a-niu, Lu-ku-mal, star: *"'*a"'
MAL, p. Z I Z , 1. 30; p. 218,
Tabl. I , 1. l o (p. q f.) ; Tabl.
I. 9.
111, 1. q (p. 38 f.), 1. 68
(var., p. 48), 1. 125 (p. 56 f.), Marduk,god: "'nC~d~iB,Talil.II
p. ~ g j p.
, 198, n. 4 ; ' " ' L a (I<. 1o,oo8), bctween I!. 85
ha-me, Tabl. 111, 1. 6 8
and raq (p. 190); Tabl. 111,
(p. 48 f . ) = Aax$ (for
1.1o(r1.38f.),l.5j(p.461.),
A
) see Introduction ;
I. "3 (p. 54f.), 1. 138
(2) monster : "" Ln-ha-niu,
(p. 56 f.); Tab\. IV, 11. j ,
Tabl. 11, 1. 27 (p. zq f.) ;
13 ( p 58f.), 11. 20, 28
" " L a - b a - n ~ i l'abl.
,
I,l. IZI
(p. 60 f.), 1. 93 (p. 70 f.),
(p. 18 f.); Tabl. 111, I. 31
1. 126 (p. 7 4 f . ) ; l'abl. V1,
I. I (p. 86 f . ) ; Tabl. VII,
( p 42 f.), I. 84 (p. 50 f.).
I. 1 2 9 (p. f . ) , I. 139
Labha, Lahmu: L a { - b a , Tabl.
111, I. 1 z j (p. 56 f.).
(P. "+I.),
p. '34, 1. 3'.
Lahmu, deity : "'La/i-mu, Tabl.
p. 1 7 8 , l . 1 7 . p . 1 8 0 , l . I ,
I I 10 ( p 4 f . ) Tabl. 111,
p. 181, 11. 2 , 3, 4, 5 , 6,
p.zog,1.7,p.z11,11.8,
1.4(~.38f.),1.68(p.q8f.);,
1 2 , 13, p. 2 1 3 , 1. 2 , p . zrq,
p. rg8, 1. 13 ; = AoX:s (tor
1. 24, p. 2 1 8 ; '"'~lfla~~dt~k
AnXdr), see Introduction.
(AN-ASAII-1.~-SAR),p. 128,
h g a l - a b [ . . . . 1, titie of
1. 7 ; (UING~I<)AS~II~-LU-SAI<
Marduk: '"'Lugal-nb-[.
1,

..

INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC.

27r

=""MarduiZ, p. 138, I. 1 0 :
(var., p. 7), I. 31 (var., P. 71,
[(DINGIR)] GI - 31 - MA =
1.47(p.8f.),1.98(p.1qf.);
""Mardulz, p. I
1. 17 ;
Tabl. IS, 1. 55 (p. 2 8 f.) ;
referred to as Be? and brlu :
= MwGp;,, see Inlroduction.
~ B, Tabl.
~ Z IV, I. 33 Mummu, title of T i a m a t ; sec
Glossary, sub nzunzmu.
p
6 2 f . ) , p. 175. I. 7,
p. 205, 1. 6, p. 21 r , I. z r , Mummu, title of Marduk: 'd"Afup. z 14, I. 27 ; be-Zu?n,
uv-niu,Tabl.VII (p. I 3,761),
Tabl. 11, 1. I I 3 (p. 32 f.),
p. r o z f.
1. 131 (p. 36 f . ) ; Tabl. IV, Mumu, title of LIarduk: '"'Mu11. 17, 2 1 (p. 60f.), 1. 49
mrr, p. 173, 1. 23.
(p. 64 f.), I. 65 (p. 66 f.), I. 75 MuBtabarrt-miitanu, Mercury :
(p.68f.),l.95(p.7of.),l. 129
""M~/~labarr~-mtiinxu,p.z
I z,
II. 25, 3 1 .
( P 74 f.), 1. 13.5 (P. 76 f . ) ;
=Bljhor, see Introduction.
Nabii, god : ""Nubn, p. 178,
1. zo.
Margida, star :
[Mar-gidNan%, goddcss : ""Na-na-[a],
da], p. 139, n. 2 .
p. z r 3, note.
Medudu, mythical prince: "MeNannar, god : '"'Nminar - 72'
du-du, p. 14z;l. 20.
(var. [kaklfaba-Szi), Tabl. V,
Melili, mythical queen: 'Me-li1. I Z (pp. 78f., l o r ) .
li, p. 142, I. 18.
Na-zi-azaga, title of Mardulz:
Memangab,
prillce:
"" N.4-21-AznG-G[A], p. 16 I .
"'Aft-nia-arr-gab, p. I ~ Z1.19.
,
'"'Nergnl,
MU azag, titie of ~
~ : Nergal,
~
dgod : ~
k p. 152,
1. 13.
"'x'-azn,y, Tabl. V I I , I. 33
Nibiru, ( I ) Jupiter: ""Ni-hi-ri
(p. 98 f,) ;
nlrr (var. Y Z  ) , Tabl. V, 1. 6 (pp.
p. 173. 1. 27 ; vat. "'MU
78 f., 1 9 0 ) : ( 2 ) title of
(i.e. ~AR)-AZAG,
p. 173,l. 26.
iVIaniub: ""Ni-6i-rr~, var.
Muljl, title of Mardnk: ""M~LP]ATe.6L-rG Tabl.VII,l. 109
ILL, Tabl. V I I (I<. 13.761)~
(p. 108 f.) ; NI-ur-nu = Nip. I 0 2 f.
6i-m,
p. 168.
Mulmul, star: Mul-mul, p. z 12,
1. 2 9 ; p.
(possible Nin-aha-kudu, goddess : (DING I I ~ ) N I N - A - I ~ A - K U D -p.
DU,
reading).
1.
5.
136,
Mulu-bad, star : M u m - RAD,
Ninib, god : ""Ni7zz-ib, p. 214,
p. 213, 11. 9, I Z , 16.
11. 2 2 , 23, -15 ; o " N i x i ~ ,p.
Mummu, minister of Apsil :
178, I . zz.
Mu-urn-mu, Tabl. I, 11. 30,
$2 '3 I (p. 6 f.). I. 48 (p. 8 f . ) ; Niu-igi-azag, god : *'Ni?z-i
aaag, p. 124, I. 9.
"'Mu-urn-niu, Tabl. I, 1. 30

-

.,

272

INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC.
~

Ninkigal,i.e.EreSkigal,goddess: Barnag, ,the Sun-god, the sun :
'"'Snmn!, Tnbl.V, II. 19, 2 1 ,
""h7i7z(i.e. Ere:) - hi - gal,
zz (p. 80 f.), p. 126, 1. 13,
p. 213, 1. 13.
p. 171, 1. 4, p. 203, n. I ,
Ninlil, goddess: ""NinZLI rP 2'3.
p. 212, 11. ~ 6 , ~ 3 p.
0 , 214,
1. 13.
11. 18, 2 2 ; "",Yc-?)ia.r, p.
Nippur, city : N$pzn.t~~', p. 2 I 7,
144, 1. 1 1 , p. 150, 1. 23.
1 . 5 ; Nip$1rri~{p.zr7,1.3;
goddess : "" S a y - p a E N - I . I L ( ~ ~=
I ) N i - i p - p ~ . ~ Sarpanitu,
~~,
ni !um, p. z I 8.
p. 130, 1. 6, p. 136, I. 39.
Sin, the Moon-god, the moon :
~ ~ d i tille
~ of~ E a~: it,'Nu.
d ,
""Sir,, p . r 1 8 , 1 . 1 6 ; p. 119,
d<n~-nztld,Tabl. I, I. 1 7 (p.
I. 1 5 ; p. 171, 1 . 4 ; p. 198,
4 f . ) ; Tabl.II,I. 58(p.30F.),
1. 1 6 ; p. z r i , I. 1 1 ; p. 212,
hetween 11. 85 ahd lo4 (p.
11.~5.28;p.222.1.5; p.236,
190); Tabl. 111, 1. 54 (p.
1. 105.
46 f.). I. I 1 2 (p. 54 1.) ;
SU-gi, star: Su-GI, p. 2 1 2 , 1. 29,
IV1 I' l Z 6 (P' 74f')' Sub-kur, titleo1Marduk: sb'S2~61. 142 (p. 76r.).
lizcr,Tabl.VII,l.4~(p~ o o f . ) ,
Nunamnir, god : '"'Nu-nan~-7zir,
cf. p. 174, 1. 31 ; "'*'("'
SUgp. 217, 1. 9 ; p. zzo, n. 1.
[I<GI<], p. 181, I. 5.
Omorka,title ofTiamat: ' O P ~ P K ~ ~
,
i ~primeval,
~ ~mythical
t , mansee Introduction.
ster ; constellalion in tile
Pan,star: P A N , ~ . Z I ~ , ~ ~ . I ~ neighbourl~ood
,Z~.
of
the
Pap-[ . . .], title of nfarduli:
ecliptic: Zi-anz<z!, Tab\. I,
'"'Po$-[
. . . Tabl. V I I
I. 4 (p. 2 F.), 11. z z , 26, 32,
(I<. 13,761). p. rozf.
33 (p.6 f.), 11. 36, 4 1 (p. 8 f.).
Pap-sukal, god : "'Pczj-sufinl,
I. 109 (p. r6 1.); Tabl. 11,
p 136, 1. q.
I . 3, 0 , r r ( p . z z f . ) , I . 1 5
Sag-garw(?), title of Marduk:
( P 24 f.), 11. 56, 75 (1'. 30 1.h
'>'Sag-gnr(?), No. 54,228,
I I . 1 2 2 . 124, 126 (p. 34f.),
1. 128 (p. 36 f.) ; Tabl. 111,
P 177, 1. 13.
11. 15, r g (p. 4of.), I. 56
Sag-me-gar, Jupitcr : "'SAG-AIEG A R , p. 212, 11. 26, 3 2 ;
(P. 4 6 f . l 1. 73 (P. 48f.L
I. 77 (var., p. 49!, 1. 114
*"'*""~AG-M~-GAI<, p. z 14,
I. 19.
(p 54 r.), 1. 128 (p. 56 f.) ;
Sag-zu, rille of Rlarduk:
s"~,<Tabl. lV, 1. 3 1 (p. 60 f.),
afr, Tabl. VII, I. j g (p. 98 f.),
I. 4' (p. 6 2 f.), 1.48 (p.641.)
H. 60, 71 (p. 66f.), 1. 76
p. 177, 1. 1 2 , p. 179, 11. z,
p. 205. I. 5, cf. p. 173,
( p 68 f.), 11. 87, 89, 93, 97
], 8 ; DIA2GIR SAG-zu,
"
p. 181,
(p. 70 f.), 1. 10.5 ( P 72 f.),
I. 5.
1. 128 (p. 74 f.), 1. 129 (var.,

1,

"#'

273

INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC.

p. 75); Tabl.VII(IC. 12,830, Tiibu, god : " " T i & u , p. r 18 f.,
p. loof.), 1. 108 (p. ro6f.),
1. 20.
1. 1 1 2 (p, loaf.), p. 175, Tutu, title of Marduk : "wTzr-fz~,
Tabl. VII, I. 9 (p. 92 f.),
p. 178, 1. 18, p. 194, p. 198.
l.zg,p.zog,11.3,6,p.z11,
1. 15 (P. 9 4 f . h 11. 19, 2.5
11. 10, 11, p. 213, 11.4, 5, 7,
(P. 96 f.). 1. 33 (P. 98 f.),
1. qr (p. 100 f.), 1. q j
9, 12, 14,p.215; ""Ti-amat,
(p. roof.), p. 177, 1. 1 0 ,
Tabl. I, 1. 88 (p. 12 f.) ;
p. 205, 1. 4 ; ""Tu-TU,
Tabl. I, 1. 32
p. 173, 1. 2 1 ; " r N G T x T ~ - ~ ~ ,
(var., p. 7) ; Ti-amat-ma,
p. 181, 1.4; '"'Tutu, p. 178,
Tabl. 11, 1. I 35 (p. 36 f.) ;
11. 16, 17.
Tabl. 111, I. 59 (p. 46 f.),
1. 117 (p. 54f.) ; Ti-amat- Q z u , star : *"*'""' Ub-zu, p. 2 1 3,
.
am-ma, Tabl. 11, 1. 135
-1. 3,(var., p. 37) ; Tabl. I I I , l . 59 Ummu-Hubur, title of Tiamat:
Urn - mu g u - bur, Tabl. I,
(var., p. 46) ; Ti-a-ma-fu,
1. "3 (p. 1 6 f . ) ; Tabl. 11,
Tabl. 11, 1. 49 (p. z8f.),
I. 19 (var., p. zq) ; Tabl. 111,
p. 142, 1. 13 ; Ti-a-ma-tum,
I. 81 (p. 50 f.) ; Urn-mu-KuTabl. 11, 1. r (p. 2 2 f.) ;
bur (var. 6u-ur) ; Tabl. 111,
Tabl. IV, 1. 129 (p. 74 f.) ;
1. 23 (p. 40 f.) ; Urn-ma-@ITi-a-ma-ti, Tabl. 11, 1. 81
6u-ur,Tabl. IS,]. 19 (p.zqf.).
(p. 30 f.), between 11. 85 and
104 (p. 190); Tabl. 111, Unug, see Uruk.
1. 56 (var., p. 46), 1. 77 UpBukkinaki, the council (p. 48 f.) ; Tabl. IV, 1. 65
chamber of the gods: Up(p. 66f.), 1. 128 (var., p.
Su - ukkin - n a - hi, Tabl. 11,
7 5 ) ; Ta-a-ma-ti, Tabl. I,
1. 137 (p. 36 f.) ; Tabl. 111,
1. 32 (var., p. 7), 1. 33 (var.,
1. 119 (p. 54f.) ; Up-Inp. 7) ; Tabl. III,I. 77 (var.,
ukkin-nu-ki (varr. ku, ham) ;
p. 49) ; Tam-tim, Tabl. IV,
Tabl. 111, 1. b r (p. 46 f.) ;
1.41 (var.,p. 62); Tabl. VII
Up-Su-ukhin-na-ha,Tabl.VI,
(I<. 8 , 5 1 9 . ~ 106
. f.) ; "' TamI. 142 (p. 90 f.).
tim, p. 2 1 I , 1. 1 2 ; Tam-tam- Uruk, Erech : UNUG(KI)= Uma, Tabl. 111, 1. 59 (var.,
ruk, p. 130, 1. 7 ; p. 136,
p. 4 6 ) ; tam-tu-um-ma, p.
1. 40.
1 1 I. 6 ; = Tau@;, and
Utu-ka-gab-a, star : UTU-~m= Iahdv@, i.e, earl;, see
GAB-A, p. 213, I. 17.
Introduction ; Ti-amat e-li- Zag-muk, Feast of the New
ti, p. 197, 1. 1 0 ; Ti-amat
Year : Zag - nzuk, p. 150.
{up-li-ti, p. I 97, 1. 1 1.
11. 14, 16.

""[...I,

-

18

274

INDEX TO DEITIES, ETC

/

.

Zamama, god : ""Za - m a -"ma, Zi ukkina, title of Marduk :
"'Zi-udkin-na, Tabl. VII.
p. 144,
.
. . . 1. to; -D. 150,
- . 1. z t .
1. 1 5 ( p 94f.); 'h'Zi-~kkljZ,
a-azag, title of Marduk :"'Zi-

Tabl. VII, 1.15 (var., p. 95) ;
cf, p,
1, 29,
ZB, god : "t'Zu-u, p. 2 18 , 1. 6.
Zulummu, title of Mardok:
Zi-si, title of Marduk : ""Zi-si,
""Zu - lum - mu, Tabl. VII
Tabl. VII, I . 41 (p. too f.) ;
(I<. r3,761), p. toz f., cf.
cf. p. 174, 1. 30.
1
p 164,
azag, Tabl. VII, 1. 19
(p. 96 f.) ; var. "'NA-ZIAZAG-G[A], p. 161.

A SELECTION
OF

MESSRS. LUZAC & GO!S

PUBLlCATlONS

I N AND ON T I l E FOLLOWING LANGUALEC,

AND LITERATURES :

ARABIC, SYRIAC, HEBRELV,
BABYLONIAN,
ASSYRIAN, PERSIAK, Erc.

Messrs. LUZAC & CO., having been appointed OFFICIAL
AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN GOVERNMENT
PUBLICATIONS and PUBLISHERS TO THE SECRETARY
OF STATE FOR INDIA I N COUNCIL, are able to supply at
the shortest notice all Works published by the GOVERNMENT
OF INDIA.
They have also been appointed OFFICIAL ENGLISH

AGENTS AND PUBLISHERS to the ASIATIC SOCIETY OF
BENGAL, THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF ST. PETERSBURG,
and THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, and keep all Works
published by the above Society and University in stock.

ORIENTAL STUDENTS are invited to submit to Messrs.
LUZAC & Co, their MANUSCRIPTS for publication before
sending them elsewhere.

Messrs. LUZAC & Co, are able to supply at the shortest
notice and most favourable terms ALL ENGLISH, FOREIGN,
and ORIENTAL BOOKS and PERIODICALS. MONTHLY
LISTS issued regularly and sent gratis on application.
Messrs. LUZAC & Co, have a Large Stock o l New and
Second-hand Oriental Works, of which they issue regularly
Lists and Catalogues, which are to be had on application.

Messrs. Luzac 61 Co.'s List of Books and Periodicals.

American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literature
~ I C ~ ~ . ~ I I , I , - Eljy
~ L\ V~I C
L I . II. I ~ I 1% I i ~ l ~ l ~
.to.I
t h ti 2
5 e ~ nI:; 1 ) c ~.i~::ncnt t f ~ h c ~ t , : v c r s ~ c v ..I c:t!iL s.,o.
quarterly. Annual subscription, 14s. '

, ll.r~n!~~n;
:ht:
l.ul.!~,l:~,l

American Journal of Theology.-Edited
by Members of the Divinity
Faculty of the University of Chicago. Quarterly. Annual subscription.
. . 13s.
- 6d. Sinele
- numbers.. -?s. 6d.
"The theologianr of Amciica are attempting to supply a real need . . . it
aims at a complete preseiltation of all rccent theologicai warli . . . we give it a
hearty welcome, as a scheme likely to prove of reai utility to theological students and
t o the cause of truth."-Guordion.
Babylonian and Oriental Record, The.-A
Monthly Magazine of t h e
Antiquities of the East. Edited by W . ST. CHAD BOSCAWENa n d
Rev. H. M. MACKENZIE. Single numbers. IS. 6d. each.
Beveridge (A. S.).-The History of HumSyiin. By Gul-Baden Begam
(Princess Kase-Body). Translated, with Introduction, Notes, Illustrations, a n d Biographical Appendix ; a n d reproduced in the Persian
from the only known manuscript of the British Museum, b y A. S.
BEVERIDGE. avo. Cloth, pp. xiv, 332, a n d 96 pages of Persian
text. With 10 plates. rot. net.
Bezold (Ch.).-Oriental
Diplomacy : being t h e transliterated Text of
t h e Cuneiform Despatches between the King of E g y p t a n d
Western Asia in t h e Fifteenth Century before Christ, discovered a t
Tell el Amarna, a n d now preserved in the British hluscum. W i t h
full Vocabulary, Grammatical Notes, etc., b y CHARLES BEZOLD.
Post Sva. Cloth, pp. xliv, 124. 18s. net.
" For the Assyriologist the book is a serviceable and handy supplement fa the
British Museum volume on the Tell el Amarna tablets. The author is specially
skilled in the art of cataloguing and dictionary makiilg, and it ir needless to ray that
he has done his work well."-The Acadern~.
"Die in dem Hauptwerke (The Tell el Amarna Tablets in the British Museum,
with autotype Faciimiies, etc.) vermiste Transcription des Keilrchrifl-tcxtcs der
Tafrln, sowie ein sehr ausfiilirliches. mitunter die Vollstlndigkeit einer Concordanz
erreichendes Vocabulary bietet die Oriental Dipionracy von C. Bcrold, das eben
deshvlb xc.ervissermassen als Schliissei an dem Publicationrwerke hetiachtet werden
kann."-key. Cent~aiblatt.
Biblia.-A
Monthly Magazine, devoted t o Biblical Archsmlagy a n d
Oriental Research. Annual subscription, including postage, 6s. 6d.
Sin& numbers. 6d.

.

Biblical World, The.-Edited
by WILLIAM R. HARPER. Published
monthly. Annual subscription, 95. Single numbers, is.
" The Biblical World maker a hithful record and helpful critic of present Biblical
Work, as well as an efficient practical and positive independent force in stimuiating
and instructing the student, preacher, and teacher."

Br6nnle (Paul). -Contributions towards Arabic Philology.
Part I :
T h e Iiit3.b al-maksftr wa'l-mamdlld. By Ibn Wallad. Being a
Treatise, Lexicographical and Grammatical, from Rlmuscripts in
Berlin, London, Paris. Edited with Texts, Critical Notes,, Introduction, Commentary, and Indices. By Dr. PAUI. BRONNLE.
I : Arabic Tent. Roy. 8vo. Cloth, pp. xii, 1z8. 7s. 6d. net ; paper
covers, 6s. net.
" T h i s is the first of a series of ten parts, in which it ia intended to publish some
important works of the earliest Arabic authors. together with systematic ilrveitigvtions
into the various branches of Ardbic Phiiology."
" I n the second part, which contvini the Introduction and Conlmentary to the
Arabic tent given in the first part, along with a Prclace m d Bibliography to the wllole
series, the author will have o p p o i t u ~ i t yof enlarging at some Length upon the
principles by which he has been guided in embarking upon this scheme."

Browne (E. G.).-Account of a rare Manuscript History of Ispahan.
Svo, pp. go. 1s. 6d. net.
Browne (E. G.). - Biographies of Persian Poets. Contained in
Chapter V, Section 6, of the TQrikli-i-Guzida, or "Select History,"
of H~mdu'llPhMustawfi of Qazwin. Translated by E. G. UROWNE.
avo, pp. 80. 2s. net.
Browne (E. G.).-The C h a h k Maqa'la (Four Discourses) of Nidhirmi-i'arbdi-i-samarqandi. Translated into English by E. G. BROWNE.
D e n y 8vo. Cloth, pp. 139. 4s. net.
Tadhkiratu 'Sh-Shu'ari (Memoirs of the Poets)
Browne (E. G.).-The
of Dawlatshih bin 'Ald'u 'd-dawla Bakhtishih al-Ghdzi of Samarqand. Edited in the Original Persian, with l'iefaces and Indices,
by E. G. BROWNE. Roy. avo. Cloth, pp. xvi, to, 622. 18s. net.
Budge (E. A. Wallis).-Oriental W i t and Wisdom, or the "Laughable
Stories."
Collected by Mir. Gregory John Uar - Hebraeus,
Maphrian of the East from A.D. 1264 to 1286. Translated from the
Syriac by E. A. WALLISDUDGE, M.A., Litt.D., D.Lit. Roy. 8vo.
Cloth., Ano.
xnvii., iv., 2oA. 6s. net.
.

.

"I" the Preface t o the present publication the satisfactory rcmark is made t1iZ.t
the valunie containing both the Syriac Text and the Translation, published r897,
price zir, [see the notice in the A t h a n e ~ mfor March 13th. ~ 8 9 7 ) .' h a s been well
received, bath in Englnlld and on the Continent,' and that ' i n answer to many
requests from Students of Literature geacmily,' ~Mersrr.Lnznc & Co. 'have decided
to issue the English Translation of it separately in u h m d y form.' "
" I n such circumstances the new volume is likely to succecd, and we need only add
that, although many of the sayings are at war with the finer asthetic taste of the
day, the collection is failly representative. and of considerable value. Of
some special interest appears to us to bc the twentieth chapter, 'Physiological
Characteristics described by the Sager.' ''-Athenmu9?8.

Budge (E. A. Wallis).-The History of the Blessed Virgin Mary and
T h e History of the Likeness of Christ which the Jews of Tiberias
made to mock at. The Svriac Texts edited with E n d i s h Translatians by E . A. W A L L I S ~ ~ U D G E M.A.,
,
Litt.D., D.iit., I<eeper
of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antlqnities in the British Museum.
Vol. I, The Syriac Tcxts, pp. xi, 224. 12.r. 6d. net. Vol. 11,
English Traoslations, p p xvii, 246. 10s. 6d. net. [Luzac's Semitic
Text and Translation Sencs, Vols. IV and V.]
~~~~

~~

~

~

~

~~~

~

List of Books and PeriodicaZs.

5

" To Mr. Budge belongs. however, the great merit of hai,ing very materially
enriched no fewer than four different branches of Orielltai Literature. Severvi of his
editions will no doubt serve ar the groundwork ior future publications. . , , The
general aspect of the volumes is all that could be dcsired."-A1hc1~et'~11,
" It may be regarded as an exceptionally excellent commentary an the New
Testament, the main iiner of which it closely follows, for in deviing witir the same
fact6 it lets in a great deai of iight on the manners, cnstorns, and ideas of the country
and the period. . . . The translations are in admirable English, and evince
singular ability."-Catholic Times.

Budge (E. A. Wallis).-The Histories of Rabban Hormizd the Persian
and Rabban Bar-'IdtB. Vol. I, Syriac Texts. Koy. 8vo, pq. nvi,
202. 12s.6d. net. [Luzac's Semitic Texts a n d Translation Series,
Vol. IX.]

Budge (E. A. Wallis).-The Histories of Rabban Hormied the Persian
and Rabban Bar-'Idti. Val. 11, P a r t I, English Translations.
Roy. avo, pp. xlii, 304. 10s. 6d. net. [Lurac's Semitic Text a n d
Translation Series, Val. X.]

Budge (E. A. Wallis).-The Histories of Rabban Hormizd the Persian
and Rabban Bar-'Idti. Val. II,,Part z, T h e Metrical Life of Rabban
Hormizd b y M$r. Sergius of Adherbaijan. English Translations.
Roy. avo, pp. 2 3 0 10s. 6d. net. [Luzac's Semitic Texl a n d Translation
Series, Vol. XI.]

Budge (E. A. Wallis).-The

History of Baralhm and Y<w&sEf. T h e
Ethiopic Version translated from the Arabic hy E n b i l ~ 8 n 1for the
Ethiopian King Galawdewh, A.D. 1 5 5 3 2 VOIS. in 3. Val. I,
T h e Ethiopic Text ; Vol. 11, English Translation, Introduction, etc.

(In the Press.)
Budge (E. A. Wallis). - T h e Laughable Stories collected by BarHebraeus. T h e Syriac Text, with a n English Translation, by
E. A. WALLISBUDGE,Litt.D., F.S.A., Keeper of the Department
of Egyptian a n d Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum. 8vo. Cloth.
21s. net. [Luzac's Semitic Tent a n d Translation Series, Vol. I.]
"Dr. BUDGE'Sbook will he welcome as a handy reading- book for advanced
stndents of Syriac. but in the meantime the storks will be an addition to the literature
of gnomes and proverbs, of which so many are found in India, and in Persian,
Hebrew, and Arabic, although not yet published. We are happy to say that
Dr. Buacc's new book is wcli edited and translated as far as we call judge."Afhrnnum.

"The worthy Syrian Bishop's idea of humour may excite admiration when we

hear that he collected his quips in the grcy dawn of the middle ages."-Pnll ivf~xli

Gazette.

Bulletin de 1'Institut francais d'Arch6ologie Orientale. Publie sous le
direction of M. E. CHASSINET. Vol. I. 4to.  1 6s. net. [Mesrrs.
Luzac Sr Co. a r e t h e sole agents for the sale of this
England a n d America.]

" Bulletin "

far

Cowper (B. H.). -Principles of Syriac Grammar. Translated and
abridged from the work af D r . HOFFMANN. avo. Cloth, pp. 184.
7r. 6d. net.
Crow (F. E.).-Arabic Manual. A Colloquial Handbook in the Syrian
Dialect. For the use of visitors t o Syria and P;~lestine,containing
a simplified Grammar, a Camprehensire English and Arabic

6

Messrr. Luzac G. Co!r
Vocabulary and Dialogues. T h e whole in English Characters,
carefully Transliterated, ,the Pronunciation being fully indicated.
Crown 8va. Cloth, pp. viu, 334. 7s. 6d.

" Messrs. Luzac have now issued a manual of colloquial Syrian Arabic, which
will be o f the great<:st use to visitors, merchants, and consular oficers . .
Mr. Crow, formerly one of the most brilliant linguists of the student-interpreters of
Constantinople, afterwards Vice-Consul a t Beyrut."-The
Spectator.

. .

DawlatshLh, see Browne.
Efes Damim. - A Series of Conversations at Jerusalem between a
Patriarch of the. Greek Church and a Chief Rabbi of the Jews,
concerning the Malicious Charge against the Jews of using Christian
Blood. Uy J. B. LIIYINSOHN. Translated from the Hebrew by
Dr. L. LOEWE. Roy. 8v0. Cloth, pp. xvi, 208. (Published 8s.)
Reduced price, 2s. 6d.
Gaster (M.). - T h e Chronicles of Jerahmeel, or the Hebrew Bible
Historiale. A Collection of Jewish Legends and Traditions. Translated for the first time from a n unique n~anuscriptin the Bodleian.
Library. With an Introduction, Notes, and full Index, and five
Facsimiles. Roy. avo. Cloth, pp. cxii, 341. With 5 plates. 10s.net.
History of Ottoman Poetry. By E. J. W. GIBE,
Gibb (E. J. W.).-A
M.R.A.S. Vol. 1. Roy. 8va. Cloth, pp. x i , 454. 2 1 ~ . net.
(Val. I1 in the Press.)
" T h e work, of which this volume is the first inrtalment, is planned on a magnificent
scale, and its execution, if one may judge of the whole by a part, will fully answer
to the conception. T h e first volume will take its rightful place as one of the most
masterly contributions ever made to Oriental learning by an English scho1ur."Aihmeum.
"Mr. Gibb writes as a master. He is undoubtedly the highest authority on Ottoman
literature in this country. No genuine student of poetry in its manifold expressions
can afford to neglect so curious and interesting a phase in its history."-Sprctnlor.
" T h i s beautiful book will be welcomed not only by scholars, but by all who love
the mysterious East. Meisrs. Luzar & Co, must be congratulated on the manner in
which they have brought out the book. It i:. t o be hoped that the second volume
will soon see the light."- WcrfrninitrrR~iizu.

Hariri.-The
Assemblies of al Hariri. Translated from the Arabic
with a n Introduction and Nates, Historical and Grammatical, by
TH. CHENRRYand F. STRINGASS. With Preface and Index by
F. F. ARBUTENOT. 2 VOIS. 8 ~ 0 . Cloth, pp. x, 540, and xi, 395.
3 0 net.
~
Harper (Robert Francis).-Assyrian and Babylonian Letters, belonging
to the K. Collection of the British Museum. By ROBERTFRANCIS
HARPER,of the University of Chicago. Vols. I to V111. Post 8vo.
Cloth. Price of each vol., zgs net.
" T h e Assyriologist will welcome them with gratitude, for they offer him a mass
of new material which has been carefully copied and well printed, and which cannot
fail to yield important results."-il~ienauni.
T h e book is well printed, and it ia a pleasure to iead the texts given in it, with
their large type a n d ample m?rgin."-Acoderny.

Hartmann (Martin). - T h e Arabic Press of Egypt.
HARTMANN.8v0. Cloth, pp. ii, 93. 3s. 6d.

By MARTIN

" A learned critlcal list of Arabic Publications."-Athdxaam,
"Such compilations as the piesent are vali~ableas Works of Reference, and ar
showing the intellectud activity of ail thosp people who fall under British influence."A ~ i n t i cQunrteriy Reuiezu.

List

oj

Books and PeriodicaZs.

7

Hebraica.-A Quarterly Journal in the interests of Semitic Study. Edited
by WILLIAMR. HARPERand the Staff of the Semitic Department
of the University of Chicago. Published quarterly. Annual subscnptlon, 14s. See American Journal of Semitic Languages, etc.
Jastrow's Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Babli and Yerushalmi,
and the Midrashic Literature. Compiled by M. JASTROW, 1'h.D.
Parts 1 to XV. qta. Boards. 5s. each part.
"This is the only Talmudic dictionary in English, and all students should subscribe
to it. The meritr of this work are now too well known to need rapetitian."Jnulih Chronirie.

King (Leonard W.).-Babylonian
Magic and Sorcery. Being " T h e
Prayers of the Lifting of the Hand." The Cuneiform Teats of a
Group of Babylonian and Assyrian Incantations and Magical
Formulz, edited with Transliterations.
Translations and full
Vocabulary. fram Tablets of the Kuyunjik Collection preserved in
the British Museum. By LEONARDW. ICING, M.A., Assistant in
the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British
Museum. Rov. Sva. Cloth. 18s. net.
"We cannot pretend to form an adequate judgment of the merits of Mr. KING'S
work, but it is manifestly conceived and executed in a very scholarly spirit."-Tjnrr.
"Mr. KING'Sbook will, we believe, be ai great use to all students oi Mesopotamian
religions, and it marks an era in Arsyriological studies in England. . . . A word
of special praise ir due to Mr. KINGfar the excellence of his autograph plater of
text."-Afh~nenm.

King (Leonard W.). - T h e Letters and Inscriptions of Hammurabi,
King of Babylon about B.C. 2200, to which are added a Series of
Letters of other Kings of the First Dynasty of Babylon. The
Original Babylonian Texts, edited from Tablets in the British
hluseum, with English Translations, Summaries of Cantents, etc.
By L. W. KING,M.A., F.S.A., Assistant in the Department of
Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Muaeurn. In three
volumes. Val. I, Introduction and Babylonian Texts. Vol. 11,
Babylonian Tents (continued). Vol. 111, Transliterations, English
Translations, Vocabularies, Indices, etc. Roy. 8vo. Cloth. Vol. I,
21s. n e t ; Vol. 11, 18s. n e t ; Vol. 111, 18s. net. [Luracs Semitic
Text and Translation Series, Vols. 11, 111, and VIII.]
"The concluding volumes of thin important hook are out at last. Mr. King
supplies an excelient vocabulary for hoth the Sumeiian and Semitic words used in
these texts, and although his translation differs somewilat from that adopted hy
German cuneiform scholars;he has kept most commendably clear fram philological
discussion. . , . Altogether, hoth he and the Museum are to be congrntuivted
on the completion of a dimcult task."-Atheneum.
"Mr. King may be congratulated on his copies of the cuneiform texts, and still
more on his translations and notes.
. T h e noter contain very full references to
the dates found in the legal documents of the period, by means of which several of
the mutilated passages in the annals can h e restored. . . . T h e vdue of these
annals can scarcely be over-estimated."-(Proff6666 Sayce) Expoiitory T z m r r .

.

.

King (Leonard W.).-The Seven Tablets of Creation, or the Babylonian
and Assyrian Legends concerning the Creation of the World and of
Mankind. z "01s. Vol. I , English Translations, Transliterations,
Glossary, Introduction, etc. Vol. 11, Supplementary (Babylonian
and Assyrian) Texts. Roy. avo. Vol. I, 18s.; Vol. 11, 15s
,[Lurac9s Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vols. XI1 and XIII.]

King (Leonard W.).-A Contribution to Babylonian History, being a
Series of Babylonian Historical Texts with English Tmnslations.
[Luzac's Semitic Text and Translation Series, Vol. XIX.] In the
Press.
Land (J. P. N.).-The
Principles of Hebrew Grammar. By J. P. N.
LAND, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of
Leyden. Translated from the Dutch by REGINALDLANE POOLE,
.Balliol College, Oxford. Demy 8vo. Cloth, pp. xx, 219. (Published
7s. 6d.) Reduced price, 5s.
Loewe (L.).-A Dictionary of the Circassian Language. I n two parts.
English-Circassian-Turkish,
and Circassiau-English-Turkish.
8vo. Cloth. (Published 21s.) Reduced price, 6s.
Loewe (L.).-Efes

Damim, see Efes.

Luzac's Oriental Grammars Series. Vols. I and 11, see Wynkoop;
Vol. 111, see Rosen ; Vol. IV, see Crow.
Luzac's Oriental List. Containing Notes and News on, and a Bibliographical List of all new Publications on Africa and the East.
Published monthly. Annual subscription, 3s. Yearly volumes
(with Index, half-bound), 5s. each.
Vol. I (1890) is entirely out of print. A few copies of Vols. 11, 111,
and IV are left at 10s. each. Vols. V to XIII (1894-1902) are still to be
had at 5s. each.
Luzac's Semitic T e x t and Translation Series. Vols. I, IV, V, IX, X,
XI, and XVI to XVIII, see Budge; Vols. 11, 111, VIII, XII, XIII,
and XIX, see King; Vols. VI, VII, XIV, and XV, see Thompson.
Margoliouth (D. S.).-Arabic Papyri of the Bodleian Library. Repraduced by the Collotype Process. With T~anscriptionand Translation. Text in 4to. pp. 7 and 2 facsimiles in large folio. 5s.
Margoliouth (D. S.).-Chrestomathia
Baidawiana. The Commentary of
El-Raidawi on Sura 111. Translated and explained for the use
of Students of Arabic. By D. S. MARGOLIDUTII,
IM.A., Laudian
Professor of Arabic in the University of Oxford, etc., etc. Post 8vo.
Cloth, 12s.net.
" T h e book is ar seholarlv as it is useful. Of articular irnoortance are t h e

.

book affords pleasure from beginning to end."--journni

Michell (R. L. N.).-An
Egyptian Calendar for the Koptic year 1617
( r p - 1 9 0 1 A.D.). Corresponding with the years 1318-1319 of the
Mohammedan Era. By ROLANDL. N. MICHELL. Uemy avo.
130 p p Cloth, 3s. Paper covers, 2s. 6d.
Some Notices of an Egyptlan Calendar for the year 1395 A.N. (1878 A . D . ) .
Published by Mr. MICHELLin Egypt in 1877.

Lirt of Books and Periodical's.

9

"One of the strangest pieces of ~ a d i n gprobably ever offerad under the name of
contemporary literature. . . . There is DO fear that anyone who uscs this
during a visit to Egypt will fail to see any particular
little booli for cons~~ltafion
ceiellratian for want of exact information as to its probable date."-Saturday Rrurm.
"This quaint and entertaining pamphlet may ciain, a foremost place among
curiosities OC modern literature. . . . Never was information so new, so oid,
so varied, so fantastic, or packed in so small a co~npars. . . . T h e Glossary
may be described as a local guzetteerva brief biographical dictionary of holy and
historical personages, an epitome of popular customs and superstitions, and a
handbook of the agricultural and natural p h ~ n o m c n aof the Nile Valley."-Acodrtsy.

Mirkhond.-The Rauzat-us-Safa ; or Garden of Purity. Translated from
; edited by F. F. ARBUTHNOT.
the original Persian by E. REHATSEIC
8vo. Cloth, Vols. I to V. lor. net each volume.
VoB. I and 2 contain: T h e Histories of Prophets, Kings, and Khalifs.
Voln. 3 a n d 4 contain : T h e Life of Muhammad the Aportle of Allah.
Vol. 5 contains : The Lives of Ab6 Balrr, O'mar, O'thmin, aud All, the four
immediate successors of Muhammad the Apostle.

Muallakat. - T h e Seven Poems suspended in the Temple ar Mecca.
I !
I 1 rn I
\
I ti\. c . . ~ , t I'. L. J . ! I S > s \ \ ' I . I ).tn
I
.
: I I
I . ! h . 6%. pp.
2jh.
: r . ( /,
,%
::\

Picart (Bernard).-Sdnes de la vie Juive dessides d'aprhs Nature par
Bernard Picart 1663-1733 Sixteen Plates (Reproduction en heliogravure Dujardin). Together in a beautiful cloth cover, richly
ornamented with gold and colours. Folio. (Frcs. so.) 12s. 6d net.
Rogers (R. W.).-A History of Babylonia and Assyria. By ROBERT
WILLIAM ROGERS, Ph.D. (Leipzig), U.D., LL.D., F.R.G.S.,
Professor in Drew Theological Seminary, Madison, New J e r s e y .
Third edition. Two "01s.
Royal 8vo. Cloth, pp. xx, 430, and
xv, 418. 20s. net.
" T h e first volume of one of t h e most useful woil<s yet published on Assyriology
has just appeared. It is not only a history of Babylonia and Arsyria brought up to
date, if is also a hirtory of Assyrian and Bnhyloniw excavation and of cuneifor~n
decipherment. For the first time the reader has placed before him a full and
interestins
discov~rvand
" account of one of the romancer of historical science-the
decipherment of the cuneiform inacriptions."-E~p~~~ttty
T~mer
" I consider Rogers's ' History of Babylonia and Assyriv' a really useful hook, the
best of its kind 5 0 far written in English. T h e fairness with which the author
endeavours to represent different views so frequently h i d with i-egard to the r a r l ~ e r
dynasties and events maker his work especially desirable for the student in the
V. HILPKECHT.P h D . . D.D., L L D , Profrsior. in lhe Univcrr;ty
class-room."-H.
o/ Pmz~yInamia,Scienf*$c Director ofUobytonian L'xplornii,m f i n d .

Rosen (F.).--A Modern Persian Colloquial Grammar. Containing a
short Grammar, Dialogues and Entlacts from Nasir Eddin Shah's
Diaries, Tales, etc., and a Vocabulary. Crown avo. Cloth,
pp.
. XI", 400. 10s.6d.
~

"Dr. ROSBN'S learned work will be ureful t o all who have occsaion to g o t o
Persia, Baluciiistun, and Afghanirtun. 'The Vocabulary will be a boon to students,
especially as it is in the same uolurnc with the grammar and the dialogues."Pu61. Circiilor.
"Very useful to r t u d e n t r . " WerfffiniterReaiew.
" Excellent guide t o the acquisition of Persian."-Ariolir
Quarltriy Review.

Ruben (Paul). - Critical Remarks upon some Passages of the Old
Testament. By PAUL RUBEN,Ph.D. 4 t 0 Cloth, pp. ii, zq, 14.
Paper covers, 2s. 6d.
3 ~6d.
.

" I t may suffice t o congratulate ourrelves that a scholar of vigorous mind and
accurate philological training is devoting his leisure to a subject worthy a[ attention.
. . , . Very many of the nates are in a high degree stirnularing and suggestive.
T h e get-up of the book is excellent."-A~oclemy.
"Dr. RUBEN shows much originality, a wide knowledge of authorities, and a true
grasp of critical principles."-/iwi$h
Chronicle.

Sauerwein (G.). -A Pocket Dictionary of the English and Turkish
Languages. Small 8vo. Limp cloth, pp. z98. 3s. 6d. net.
Sayce (A. H.).-Address to the Assyrian Section of the Ninth International
Congress of Orientalists. 8v0, pp. 32. IS.
Scholia on Passages of the Old Testament. By MAXJACOB,Bishop of
Edessa. Now first edited in the original Syriac, with a n English
Translation and Notes by G. PHILLIP,U.D. 8vo. Paper covers.
5s. net.
Thompson (R. Campbell).-The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers
of Nineveh and Babylon. In the British Illuseurn. The Original
Text, printed in Cuneiform Characters, edited with Translations,
Notes, Vocabulary, Index, and an Introduction. By R. CAMPBELL
THOMPSON,
B.A. (Cantab.),Assistant in the Department of Egyptian
and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum. In two vols. Val. I,
The Cuneiform Texts. Val. 11. English Translations, Vocabulary,
etc. Roy. 8vo. Cloth. 12s. 6d. net each.
Mr. Thompson g i ~ e us
s the cuneiform text of what is, practically, the complete
series of the Astrological Reports of the Royal Library at Nineveh-that is to say,
copies of about 180 tablets and transliterations of about 220 dupllcatea, without
reckoning the transliterations of the texts of the original series. In addition, we
find a translation of the tablets in English, and a vocabulary, with references, and
a rubiect index. The work in each of these sections has been carefully done."Na1ui-e.
' ' T h e value of the book is enhanced by its excellent indices. Thosc who wish
to know what the astrological lore of Babylonia was like cannot do better than
study it."-Expoiiiory
Tim-.

Thompson (R. Campbell).-Assyrian Incantations, Spells, and Formulz,
directed against the Attacks of Evil Spirits. Translated and Transliterated, with Vocabulary, Indexes, and an Introduction. 2 vals.
Kay. 8vo. (In the Press.)
Tiele (C. P.).-Western Asia, according to the mast recent Discoveries.
Rectorial Address on the occasion of the 318th Anniversary of the
Leyden University, 8th February, 1893. Translated by ELIZAEETH J.
TAYLOR. Small avo. Cloth, pp. 36. 1s. 6d.
"An

authoritative summary of the results of recent Oriental research and

discovery."-The Timer.

" T h e address presents a graphic picture of the political situation in Western Asia
in the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries e.C."-Monnng Poit.

Electronic publication prepared by
Kelvin Smith Library
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, Ohio
for
ETANA Core Texts
http://www.etana.org/coretexts.shtml

