HILDEGARD OF BINGEN: SELECTED WRITINGS 




KNOW THE WAYS 


l. Letter to Bernard of Clairvaux 





Hildegard to Bernard of Clairvaux, 1146 [Letter 1] 1 

Venerable Father Bernard, you are held wonderfully in high honour by the power of God. You are a terror to the 
unlawful foolishness of the world; you burn in the love of God’s son; you are eager to win men for the banner of 

the Holy Cross to fight wars in the Christian army against the fury of the pagans. 2 Father, I ask you, by the 
living God, to attend to my questions. 

I am very concerned by this vision which has appeared to me in the spirit of mystery, for I have never seen it 
with the external eyes of the flesh. I who am miserable and more than miserable in my womanly existence have 
seen great wonders since I was a child. And my tongue could not express them, if God’s Spirit did not teach me 
to believe. 

Most gentle Father, you are secure; in your goodness please answer me, your unworthy servant, for since I 
was a child I have never felt secure, not for a single hour! Could you search your soul, in your piety and wisdom, 
and discover how you are instructed by the Holy Spirit, and pour consolation upon me, your servant, from your 
heart? 

For in the text I know the inner meaning of the exposition of the Psalter and the Gospel and other books 
shown to me in this vision, which touches my heart and soul like a consuming fire, teaching me these 
profundities of exposition. But it does not teach me writings in the German tongue - these I do not know - and 

I only know how to read for the simple meaning, not for any textual analysis. 3 Give me an answer as to what 
you think, for I am a person ignorant of all teaching in external matters; I am taught inwardly, in my soul. 
Therefore I speak as one in doubt. 

Hearing of your wisdom and piety I am comforted. Because there is so much divisiveness in people I have not 
dared to speak of these things to any other person except for one monk - whom I tested with regard to the 
integrity of his monastic life. I revealed all my secrets to him and he consoled me and convinced me that these 
are great secrets and things to be feared. 

Father Bernard, I want you to reassure me, and then I will be certain! In a vision two years ago I saw you as a 
man able to stare at the sun without flinching, a courageous man. And I wept because I blush so much - 
because I am so timid! Good Father, through your kindness I have found a place in your soul, so that now, if you 

will, you can reveal to me through your word4 whether you want me to say these things openly or whether I 
should keep quiet. For I have great trouble with this visionary gift about how much I should say of what I have 
seen and heard. And sometimes, because I keep quiet, I am laid low by the vision and confined to my sickbed, 
unable to raise myself up. So I am sad, I lament before you: I am unstable with the movement of the wooden 
beam of the wine-press in my nature, the beam which grew at the prompting of the devil from the root in Adam 

(for which he was cast out as a wanderer in this exile wo rid). 5 But now I raise myself up, I run to you, I speak to 
you. You are not unstable, you ease the pressure of the wooden beam, you gain the victory in your soul! And it is 

not only yourself alone: you raise up the whole world to salvation! You are the eagle staring at the sun! 

And so I entreat you: by the brightness of the Father, by his wonderful Word, by the sweet humour of 
compunction, by the Spirit of Truth, by the sacred sound through which all creation resounds, by the Word from 
which all the world was created, by the height of the Father who through the sweet power of green vigour sent 
the Word to the Virgin’s womb where it took on flesh like the honey in the honeycomb! May the sacred sound, 
the power of the Father, fall upon your heart and raise up your soul so that you are not passive and indifferent 
to the words of this correspondent, as long as you seek all things from God, from man or woman, or from the 
mystery, until you pass through the doorway in your soul and know these things in God. 

Farewell. Be well in your soul, and strong in your certainty in God. Amen7 


2. The Action of the Will (from Scivias I, 4) 


In a series of images based on her concept of ‘greenness’, this digression in the middle o/Scivias 1, 4 presents 
some of Hildegard’s ideas on anthropology. Perhaps written before the letter to Bernard, it has been compared 
to writings by Hugh of St Victor and Honorius ofAutun and reveals how widely read she must have been, 
especially as she did not base the passage on one particular identifiable source. Di'awing on wide knowledge, 
Hildegard describes her understanding of such ideas as the relation of soul and body, human understanding 
and the action of the will. 



17 . How the soul reveals its capabilities according to the capabilities of the body 

The soul reveals her capabilities according to the capabilities of the body, so that in childhood she brings forth 
simplicity, in youth strength, and in the fullness of age, when all the veins of the human being are full, she 
brings forth her greatest strength in wisdom. In the same way a tree in its first growth brings forth tender 
shoots, goes on then to bear fruit and finally ripens that fruit to the fullness of utility. But afterwards in old age 
when a human being’s bones and veins incline to weakness, then the soul reveals gentler strengths, as though 
tired of human knowledge. In the same way, at the onset of wintertime, the sap of the tree withdraws from the 
leaves and branches as the tree begins to incline towards old age. 



i8. The human being contains three paths 


A human being contains three paths: namely, soul, body and senses. On these three paths, human life runs its 
course. The soul fills the body with life and brings forth the senses; for its part the body attracts the soul to it 
and opens the senses; in turn the senses touch the body and draw the soul to them. The soul provides the body 
with life like fire flooding the darkness with light; it has two major powers like two arms: the understanding and 
the will. Not that the soul has these limbs to move herself about; rather she reveals herself in these two powers 
like the sun manifesting itself in the splendour of its light. Therefore human being, you are not a bundle of 

veins; pay attention to the knowledge of the scriptures. 1 


19. Human understanding 


Human understanding is connected to the soul like the arms to the body. For just as the arm is joined to the 
hand and the hand to the fingers, so also there is no doubt that understanding proceeds from the soul and 
activates the other powers of the soul, by which it knows and recognizes human actions. For over all the other 
powers of the soul it is understanding which distinguishes what is good from what is bad in human actions. 
Understanding is therefore a teacher through whom all things are known, for in this way he shakes out all 
things just as the wheat is separated from the stalks and husks; he examines what things are useful and what 
are useless, what things are lovable and what are hateful, what things belong to life and what to death. 

Just as food without salt is bland, so also the other powers of the soul are weak and unknowing without it. 
Understanding is in the soul like the shoulders in the body, acting as the moving force behind the other powers 
of the soul, giving them strength like the shoulders give strength to the body. It is flexible, like the bend of the 
arm, discerning both the divine and the human in God. Thus human understanding works with true faith, for 
like the articulation of the fingers of the hand it can distinguish between many diverse actions. It therefore 
operates differently from the other forces of the soul. Why is this? 



20. The will 


The will warms an action, the mind receives it, and thought bodies it forth. The understanding, however, 
discerns an action by the process of knowing good and evil just as the angels also have an understanding that 
loves good and hates evil. And just as the body has a heart, so too the soul has understanding, which exercises 
its power in one part of the soul just as the will does in another. 

How does this happen? The will in fact has great power in the soul. How does this come about? The soul 
stands, so to speak, in the corner of the house, that is, in the firm support of the heart, like a man standing in 
the corner of a house in order to survey the whole house and supervise its running. He raises his right arm to 
give a sign and points out things useful to the house as he turns towards the east. The soul does likewise on the 
roadways of the whole body when she looks towards the rising of the sun. The soul uses the will, as it were like 
her right arm, as a firm support for the veins and the bones and the movement of the whole body, for the will 
directs every action, whether for good or ill. 



21. The parable of the fire and the bread 


The will is like a fire baking every action in an oven . 2 Bread is baked in order to feed people and strengthen 
them so that they can live. The will is the force behind the whole of the action. It grinds the action in a mill, it 
adds yeast and kneads it firmly and thus carefully prepares the action, like a loaf of bread which the will bakes to 
perfection in the heat of its zeal. In so doing it provides human beings with a better food than bread for the 
activities they do. For while food is taken into the human body and used up, the action of the will endures 
within the human being until the separation of the soul from the body. And although the action will vary greatly 
in childhood, in youth, in maturity and in the declining years, nevertheless the will directs it stage by stage and 
brings it to perfection. 


3. Redemption (Scivias II, 1 ) 


In a version of the creation, the fall of Adam, and the redemption of humanity, Hildegard presents the story of 
her vision in a series of mysterious pictures. The work of God, for instance, is seen as a shining fire with a 
flame the ‘colour of air, and the creation of the cosmos takes place when a dark sphere of air representing the 
basic matter of the world is brought into contact with the divine fire and illumined with light. Later, the fire 
merges with the brightness of the dawn on earth, the dawn being the light of the Incarnation, and the power of 
redemption centres on the appearance of a ‘light-filled man’. In the original illustration to the scene, preserved 
in the Rupertsberg manuscript (see Introduction I. i), the ‘light-filled man’ is a reddish golden figure 
surrounded by large golden flames above his head and emerging from a red and golden circle, presumably the 
dawn, at the bottom of the picture. 


Scivias, Part II, Vision 1 


And I, a human being, neither ablaze with the strength of strong lions nor learned in their exhalations , 1 
remaining in the fragility of the weaker rib, but filled with mystical inspiration, saw: a shining fire, 
unfathomable, inextinguishable, fully alive and existing full of life; with a flame the colour of the air, brightly 
burning in the gentle breeze, and as inseparable from the shining fire as a human being is inseparable from his 
inner organs. And I saw the shining flame glow white. And suddenly a dark sphere of air appeared, huge in size, 
upon which the shining flame struck many blows, and at each blow a spark flew up so that soon the circle of air 
was brought to completion, and heaven and earth shone forth in the fullness of perfection. The burning flame of 
heat moved towards a small clump of muddy earth lying on the circle of the ball of air. And it heated the clump 
of earth, turning it to flesh and blood, and breathing life into it so that it rose up as a living man. Once this was 
done, the shining fire with its flame burning bright in the gentle breeze offered the man a brilliant white flower 
that hung in the flame like a drop of dew on a stalk of grass. The man could smell its fragrance with his nose but 
not taste it with his mouth or touch it with his hands. And he turned away and fell into thick darkness from 
which he could not raise himself up. But the darkness grew and spread further and further across the air. Then 
three large stars appeared in the darkness, combining in their brightness, and after them many others, small and 
large, shining in high splendour. Finally a great star appeared, radiating marvellous clarity and directing its 
splendour towards the aforesaid flame. But on the earth a brightness like the dawn appeared, merging with the 
flame in a marvellous manner but nevertheless not becoming separated from the shining fire. And in this way, 
in the brightness of the dawn, a great will was kindled. 

But when I tried to consider more closely the kindling of that will, I was opposed by a secret seal on the 

vision, - and I heard a voice speak to me from on high: ‘Of this mystery you may not see any more than is 
granted you through the miracle of belief.’ 

And I saw a light-filled man emerge^ from the aforesaid dawn and pour his brightness over the 
aforementioned darkness; it repulsed him; he turned blood-red and pallid, but struck back against the darkness 
with such force that the man who was lying in the darkness became visible and resplendent through this 
contact, and standing up, he came forth out of the darkness. And thus the light-filled man, who had emerged 
from the dawn, appeared in greater splendour than any human tongue can express, and he proceeded to the 
utmost heights of immeasurable glory, where he shone out wondrously in the fullness of great fragrance and 
fruitfulness. 

And I heard a voice speaking to me from the living fire I have mentioned: Insignificant earthly creature! 

Though as a woman you are uneducated4 in any doctrine of fleshly teachers in order to read writings with the 
understanding of the philosophers, nevertheless you are touched by my light, which touches your inner being 
with fire like the burning sun. Shout and tell! And write down these my mysteries which you see and hear in the 
mystical vision! Do not be afraid, but tell the mysteries as you understand them in the spirit, as I speak them 
through you. May they be ashamed who should be showing righteousness to my people! Through the 

fickleness^ of their own morals, they refuse to proclaim openly the justice which they know for themselves! 
They have no will to cease from their evil desires, which stick to them as though they were their teachers, 
causing them to run away from the face of the Lord, so that they are ashamed to speak the truth. Therefore, 
paltry soul, instructed as you are in your inner being by mystical inspiration, and although you are trampled by 
the male form because of Eve’s transgression, speak nevertheless of the fiery work of salvation which this most 
certain vision reveals to you! 

The living God, who created all things through his Word, led the miserable human being who had fallen into 
darkness back to the salvation of faith through the Word incarnate. What does this mean? 


i. The omnipotence of God 


The ‘shining fire’ which you see^ represents the omnipotent living God, whose light-filled brightness is never 
obscured by any evil. He remains ‘unfathomable’, because he cannot be divided by any divisions, and he is 
without beginning or end, not to be comprehended by any glimmer of creaturely knowledge. And he remains 
‘inextinguishable’, for he is that plenitude which never reaches an end, and he is ‘fully alive’, since nothing can 
be completely hidden that he does not know about, and ‘existing full of life’, for everything that is alive draws its 
life from him, as Job declares and speaks by my inspiration: 


2 . The words of Job 

‘Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this? In whose hand is the soul of every 
living thing, and the breath of all mankind.’? 

What does this mean? No creature can be so stupid by nature that it is ignorant of all the causes and 

relationships which make up its fruitfulness and fertility. ^ And how is this? The sky has light, the light air, the 
air birds; the earth nourishes the greenness, the greenness the fruit, the fruit the animals; all testify that they 
were established by a mighty hand - the great power of the Lord of all, who through the force of his strength 
has worked all things so that none may fail in their usefulness. All creatures live and move in the omnipotence 
of the Creator, not only those who seek the earth and earthly things as do cattle, which do not have rationality 
by the inspiration of God, but also those who inhabit human flesh in which they partake of rationality, power of 
discernment, and wisdom. 

How is this? The soul encircles earthly matters, at work through the many changes that fleshly customs 
demand of it. But the spirit raises itself up in two ways: on the one hand by heaving sighs, groanings and desires 

for God, 9 on the other by seeking as it were through commands to exercise sovereignty, influence and 
autonomy in various areas, because through reason the spirit has the power of discernment. Therefore, also, the 

human being contains the likeness of heaven and earth within her. 10 How does this come about? The human 
creature contains a circle in which there appear the qualities of discernment, breath of life and rationality, just 
as in the heavens there are stars, air and birds. Likewise, the human creature contains a receptacle in which 
there appear the moisture of the humours, germination and parturition, just as on earth there is greenness, 
fruitfulness and animals. What does this mean? Human creature! You are a wholeness in every created thing 
and yet you forget your creator! All things subject to you obey their creator as they were made to. But only you 
desire to transgress his commandments? 


3. Before and after the Incarnation the Word remains indivisibly and eternally with the Father 

You see in your vision ‘the fire having a flame the colour of the air, brightly burning in the gentle breeze, and as 
inseparable from the shining fire as a human being is inseparable from his inner organs’. This is the infinite 
Word, which is in the Father before time, before the working of creation. In the glow of love, this Word was to 
become incarnate, in the course of time, miraculously and without stain or weight of sin, through the pure green 

vigour 1 of the Holy Spirit in the dawn of blessed maidenhood. And before his assumption of flesh the Word 
was indivisible in the Father and remained inseparable in him after his assumption of human nature. For as a 
human being cannot exist without the breath of air in his inner organs, in the same way, the unique Word 
cannot be separated in any way from the Father. 


4 . Why the Son of God is called the Word 


And why is he called the Word? For the following reason. Through the speaking of the localized word, 12 which 
is impermanent, in the dust of humanity, wise and prudent people understand the commands of a ruler and the 

reason for his commands. 1 3 Similarly also, through the utterance of the unlocalized Word, which is permanent 
in the inextinguishable life that lives through eternity, the strength of the Father is understood by the various 
creatures of the world who sense and recognize it as the origin of their created state. Likewise, just as the 
capacity and the glory of the human being are known by the functioning word, so the sanctity and the goodness 

of the Father shine through the perfectly filled Word. 1 4 


5. How the whole of creation was roused by God’s Word and how humanity came back to life 

through salvation 

When you see the ‘shining flame glow white’, it means that God’s Word revealed its power as it were by catching 
fire: the whole of creation was roused by him and grew incandescent when the Word became incarnate in the 
dawn and brilliance of maidenhood, so that from the Word all the virtues and powers flowed in the knowledge 
of God when humanity came back to life in the salvation of souls. 



6. How God’s unknowable power fashioned the world and brought forth the various species 


‘And suddenly a dark sphere of air appeared, huge in size.’ This is the basic material of creation, still in the 
darkness of imperfection and not yet illuminated or filled with creatures. This material is a ‘sphere’ because it is 

within God’s unknowable power, since his divinity is never absent. 1 ^ It rises in God’s great power and in the 
winking of an eye is transported to the heights of heavenly will. 

‘The shining flame struck many blows upon it,’ as a blacksmith does, ‘and at each blow a spark flew up so that 
soon the sphere of air was brought to completion, and heaven and earth shone forth in the fullness of 
perfection.’ The meaning is this. The Word from on high, surpassing the whole of creation, revealed the force of 
his strength by creating creatures, who pay him their allegiance. From the basic material he brought forth the 
diverse species of creatures gleaming in the wonder of their birth and awakening - like a smith skilfully 
fashioning his artefacts out of bronze - until created things shone resplendent in the beauty of fullness. Each 
was ranked into higher and lower orders, all having the attractiveness and stability of perfect workmanship and 
shining on each other from above and from below. 


7. After the creation of the other creatures the man was created from the clay of the earth 


‘The burning flame of heat moved towards a small clump of muddy earth lying on the bottom of the circle of 
air.’ After creating the other creatures, in the strong will of the Father and in the love of heavenly sweetness, the 
Word of God contemplated the soft, crumbly material - the weak frailty of human nature - out of which both 
good and evil humans would be created. This was detained still in the depths of unconsciousness and heaviness 
and not yet awakened by the rousing breath of life. 

‘And it heated the clump of earth, turning it to flesh and blood.’ 1 ^ This means that the flame through green 
vigour pours heat into the clump of earth, because earth is the material out of which human flesh is made, 

nourishing it with its moisture like a mother suckling a child. 1 " 

‘And breathing life into it so that it rose up as a living man.’ This means that the flame awakens him with 
heavenly power and marvellously brings forth a rational human being made up of body and soul. 1 ^ 


8. How Adam, having received the gentle commandment of clear obedience, did not accept it, on 

the advice of the devil 

‘Once this was done, the shining fire with its flame burning bright in the gentle breeze offered the man a 
brilliant white flower that hung in the flame like a drop of dew on a stalk of grass.’ When the Father, who is 
brightest Light, had created Adam, he entrusted him, through the Word in the Holy Spirit, with the gentle 
commandment of clear obedience, which clings to the Word in the moist green vigour of fruitfulness; for by that 
same Word a most pleasing sacred moisture streams like dew from the Father in the Holy Spirit, producing 
great and plentiful fruit, just as pure dew falling on grass brings it most fittingly to germination. 

‘The man could smell its fragrance with his nose but not taste it with his mouth or touch it with his hands.’ 
The meaning is this. With his nose, as it were, he inhaled the precepts of the law with the knowledge of wisdom; 
with his mouth, however, he was unable to take in fully the power of the law’s intimate embrace; and with the 
work of his hands he could not perfect the law in the fullness of blessedness. 

‘And he turned away and fell into thick darkness from which he could not raise himself up.’ The reason is that 
following the advice of the devil he turned his back on the divine command and fell into the jaws of death, 
because he did not seek God either in faith or works. Thus burdened by his sins, he was unable to rise up to true 
knowledge, until the coming of him who obeyed his Father fully without sin. 

‘But the darkness grew and spread further and further across the air.’ The power of death in the world was 
continually increased by the spread of the vices, and the consciousness of humanity became all the more 
entwined in the diversity of the many vices, which broke out in the horror of putrid sins. 



9. How Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the other prophets broke through the darkness of the world 

with their prophecies 

‘But then three large stars appeared in the darkness, combining in their brightness, and after them many others, 
small and large, shining in high splendour.’ In these three large stars there is a figure of the heavenly Trinity; 
they represent namely Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who embrace each other both in their faithful works and also 

in their family relationship, 1 9 and with their prefigurements they break through the darkness of the world. They 
are followed by many other prophets, both minor and important, radiating the light of many marvellous 
miracles. 


io. How, shining in wonders, the principal prophet John prefigured the Son 

‘Finally a great star appeared, radiating marvellous clarity and directing its splendour towards the aforesaid 
flame.’ This is the principal prophet John the Baptist, shining in miracles through his most faithful bright 
works, and thus prefiguring the true Word, that is, the true Son of God, for John did not yield to evil but 
resolutely and firmly rejected it with his works of justice. 



ii. With the incarnation of the Word, the great and ancient plan became visible 


‘But on the earth a brightness like the dawn appeared, merging with the flame in a marvellous manner but 
nevertheless not becoming separated from the shining fire.’ This means that God planted a great splendour of 
red light in that place of growth; he sent his Word into it full of desire, and he did not separate himself from his 
Word, but gave it as a bounteous fruit and brought forth from it a great fountain, so that every faithful throat 
that drank from it would no longer be dry with thirst. 

‘And in this way, in the brightness of the dawn, a great will was kindled.’ Thus in the brightness of red shining 
light the green force of the great plan of old was seen, so that all the preceding legions marvelled over this in 
happiness and light. 



12. The human creature should not investigate the secrets of God any more than he wishes to 

reveal them 


You, human creature! In the way of humans, you desire to know more about this exalted plan, but a seal of 
secrecy will be imposed on you; for you are not permitted to investigate the secrets of God more than the divine 
majesty wishes to reveal, because of his love for believers. 



13 * The Son of God, born into the world, defeated the devil by his death and led his chosen people 

to their inheritance 

‘And I saw a light-filled man emerge from the aforesaid dawn and pour his brightness over the aforementioned 
darkness; it repulsed him; he turned blood-red and pallid, but struck back against the darkness with such force 
that the man who was lying in the darkness became visible and resplendent through this contact, and standing 
up, he came forth out of the darkness.’ This signifies God’s Word, incarnate inviolately in the glory of unstained 
maidenhood, and born without pain, but nevertheless not separated from the Father. How did this happen? 
When the Son of God was born into the World through the Mother, he appeared in heaven in the Father; 
therefore the angels immediately trembled and sang sweet praises in their joy. He lived in the world without 
stain of sin and sent forth into the darkness of unbelief a light-filled blessing of doctrine and salvation; but he 
was rejected by an unbelieving people and led away to suffer; he shed his beautiful blood and tasted in his body 
the darkness of death. By this means he overcame the devil, led forth his elect from hell in which they had been 
thrown down and confined, and brought them back, through his mercy and the touch of his redemption, to the 
inheritance which they had lost in Adam. And when they arrived in their inheritance, drums and harps sounded 
and songs of music in countless beautiful variations, for the human being who had been lying in a lost state was 
now in a blessed state. Freed by heavenly virtue, he had escaped death. As I said through my servant Hosea: 



14 * The words of Hosea on the same matter 


‘The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid. The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him: he 
is an unwise son; for he will not stand in the face of the misery of his children. I will deliver them from the hand 

of death. I will be your death, O death, I will be your destruction, O underworld .’ 20 

What does this mean? The evil iniquity of the devil is bound in the weight of bondage, for he has not earned 
release by the zeal of God, since he has never looked upon God in righteous knowledge in the way that others 
look upon him who fear him in faith. The devil always raises himself up against God saying ‘I am a god’ and 
deceiving himself about the blessed one of the Lord. Because of him he opposes all who are Christians. 
Therefore his malice is hidden to such an extent that no medicine is suitable to cover his sin with salvation, the 
sin which he so cruelly commits in the impurity of his pride. Therefore he will be in the bitterness of pain, like a 
woman giving birth, desperately worried about whether she will be able to survive the opening of her womb. 
This unhappiness will remain hanging over him; he will be deserted by beatitude, for the wisdom of children 
will flee from him, because he does not come to himself, unlike the one who came to himself and moved from 

iniquity back to his father . 2 

For these reasons he will never stand faithful and contrite like the children of salvation who through the 
heavenly Son overcame that death-bringing, hard-hearted iniquity. The same venomous serpent caused this 
iniquity to come forth when he tempted the first man with a cunning which he did not know about. But because 
these children despise the venom of that impure temptation and look to their salvation, I will free them from 
the servitude of idols. Those deceived by idols are in the power of perdition, and through idols the unbelievers 
forsake the honour of their Creator, entangling themselves in the traps of the devil and carrying out his works 
according to his will. 

And therefore I will redeem from the punishment of hell the souls of those who love me and worship me, 
that is, the souls of the saints and the souls of the just; for no one can be saved from the bonds of the devil, in 
which he or she is tied up by bitter death because of their breaking of God’s commandments, except by the 
redemption of the one who will redeem his chosen people with his own blood. I will utterly destroy you, death, 
for I will take from you those by whom you think you can live, so that you will be called a useless corpse! You 
will be thrown down in your greatest strength, just as the body which is vacated by the soul is cast down to 
complete destruction. For the fountain of the water of life will overwhelm you when the happy souls are 
mercifully awakened to heavenly blessedness by the new man, who will not be the companion of venomous 
deception. Therefore, O underworld, I will be the bite of your overturning, when, in my power and great 
strength, I take from you the spoils which you so fraudulently seized! Thus justly deprived, you will never again 
appear whole and filled with riches. Hideous, prostrate, covered in wounds, you will bear your disgrace in 
perpetuity! 


15 . The body of the Son of God, lying in the tomb for three days, rose again and showed 

humanity the way of truth from death to life 


But you see that ‘the light-filled man, who had emerged from the dawn, appeared in greater splendour than any 
human tongue can express’. This shows that the Father’s glory touched the most noble body of the Son of God, 
born of the sweet Virgin, lying in the tomb for three days, in order to confirm that there are three persons in one 
Godhead. Thus he received back the Spirit and rose again in brightest immortality in such a way that no human 
imagination or words can explain. And the Father presented him with his open wounds to the heavenly choirs, 

saying: ‘This is my beloved Son, 22 whom I sent to die for the people.’ Then a joy unknowable to the human 
mind rose up among them, for the sinful oblivion in which God was not known was now overcome, so that 

human reason, 2 3 which had been knocked down by the wiles of the devil, had now risen up to the knowledge of 
God. And through a great blessing the way of truth was now revealed to humankind, who had been led out of 
death into life. 


i6. How the Son of God rose from death and appeared often to his disciples to strengthen them 


Just as the children of Israel were freed from Egypt, crossing the desert in forty years and reaching a land of 
milk and honey, so the Son of God rose from the dead and graciously appeared for forty days to his disciples and 
the holy women, who mourned for him and desired with great longing to see him. He did this to strengthen 
them so that they would not doubt by saying: ‘We have not seen him and so we cannot believe that he is our 
salvation.’ But he showed himself to them on many occasions to strengthen them so that they would not fall. 



17. By his ascension to the Father the Son of God showered his bride with diverse adornments 

The fact that he then ‘proceeded to the utmost heights of immeasurable glory, where he shone out wondrously 
in the fullness of great fragrance and fruitfulness’ has the following interpretation. The Son of God ascends to 
the Father, who alone with the Son and the Holy Spirit is the utmost excellent height of inexpressible joy and 
bliss. There the Son appears gloriously to the faithful in the abundance of bright sanctity and blessedness, and 
they believe in the purity and simplicity of their hearts that he is true God and man. Then the new bride of the 
lamb is showered with diverse adornments; she will be decorated with every kind of virtue for the great battle 
which will be fought by all the faithful against the venomous serpent. 

May whoever sees with watchful eyes or hears with echoing ears offer a kiss and embrace to these my mystical 
words, which are uttered by me, the Living One. 



4* Letter to Odo of Soissons 


This letter is a classic example of Hildegard’s willingness and ability, through the ‘living light’ as she put it, to 
participate in the scholastic controversies of her day. Odo, a theologian and master at Paris, heard of 
Hildegard at the Synod of Trier (1147-8) and wrote to ask her opinion of Gilbert Porreta’s statements on the 
Trinity, which were discussed at the Council ofRheims in 1148 (for Odo’s letter, see 32 below). In his thinking, 
Gilbert had sought to make a real distinction between God and the godhead. He termed the latter the form of 
God’ i.e. the nature or being of God, in which the Trinity is one. But whatever has being through this form is 
not one, he thought, but three unities. Gilbert therefore saw a real difference between, on the one hand, the 
three divine Persons, and, on the other hand, divine being itself. Thus it seemed to him necessary to deny that 
the Father and paternity had the same identity, a position which placed him (apparently unwillingly) in 

opposition to Church doctrine. He eventually withdrew these statements after the discussions at Rheims. 1 


Hildegard to Odo of Soissons, 1148 [Letter 40R] 


I, a mere woman, tell you this in the smoke of aromatic spices on the high mountain. The sun shines down its 
light and illuminates the many unpleasant matters in various places. 

You, Master Odo, in your teaching, have made many channels into the Scriptures, which you then direct to 
others, both great and small, whereas I only tremble at my humble status. 

Listen now: a king sat on his throne, high pillars before him splendidly adorned and set on pediments of 
ivory. They showed the king’s vestments in great honour everywhere. Then the king chose to lift a small feather 
from the ground, and he commanded it to fly just as the king himself wished. But a feather does not fly of its 
own accord; it is borne up by the air. So too I am not imbued with human doctrine or strong powers. Nor do I 
desire good bodily health. Rather, I depend entirely on God’s help. 

And I say to you: I heard from a certain man fluent in doctrine who asked me whether or not the paternity of 
the high Father and the divinity of God were identical with God. And he asked me, a fainthearted woman, to 
look carefully to the true Light to find out about these things. And I looked and learned, not by my own inquiries 
but by looking into the true Light, that God is in fact both paternity and divinity, for we human beings are not 
capable of learning about God in the same way that we learn about the humanity of other human beings or 
about the quality of their actions. 

The Living Light therefore speaks with the secret word of Wisdom: God is full and whole and beyond the 
beginning of time, and therefore he cannot be divided or analysed by words as a human being can. God is a 
whole and nothing other than a whole, to which nothing can be added and from which nothing can be taken 

away. For he-who-is is both paternity and divinity, since it is said ‘I am who I am ’. 2 And he-who-is is fullness 
itself. How is this to be understood? By his activity, creativity and perfection. 

Whoever says that God is not paternity and divinity is naming a middle point without a circle. And whoever 
insists on having a middle point without a circle denies the one who is eternal. And whoever denies that God is 
both paternity and divinity denies God, for he implies that there is a kind of emptiness in God, which is not the 
case. But God is fullness and whatever is in God is God. God cannot be shaken or passed through a sieve by 
human thinking, for there isn’t anything in God that is not God. And since creation has a beginning, human 
reasoning has to find God through names and concepts, for human reasoning itself is by its nature full of names 
and concepts. 

Now, O man, listen again to the poor little form of a woman speaking to you in the Spirit: God wants you to 
make straight your paths and to be subject to him so that you may be a living rock in the cornerstone. In this 
way you will not be separated from the tree of life. 


5. The Trinity (Scivias II, 2 ) 


The illustration accompanying this vision of the Trinity in the Rupertsberg codex shows a series of three 
concentric coloured circles with a large figure of a man standing in the middle. The subtlety with which 
Hildegard uses imagery to explain the mysteries of the Trinity should be compared with her letter to Odo of 
Soissons (4) on the same subject. 



Scivias, Part II, vision 2 


Then I saw an extremely bright light and in the light the figure of a man the colour of sapphire, and it was all 
burning in a delightful red fire. And the bright light flooded through all the red fire, and the red fire through all 
the bright light, and the bright light and the red fire shone together through the whole figure of the man so that 
they were one light in one strength and power. And again I heard the living light speaking to me. 



l. The sense of God’s mystery 


This is the sense of God’s mystery: in order that we might clearly perceive and understand what his fullness is, 
the origin of which has never been seen and in which there is never any lack of the powerful strength that 
established all the streams of spiritual force. For if God were ever to be empty of his own greenness and power, 
what would become of his works? They would of course be in vain. Therefore he who is the maker is seen in the 
fullness of his works. 



2 . The three persons 


Therefore you see ‘an extremely bright light’, which signifies the Father, who is without the stains of illusion, 
failure or deceit. And in the light is ‘the figure of a man the colour of sapphire’, which represents the Son, who is 

without the stains of hard-heartedness, 1 envy or evil, and who before all time, according to his divinity, was 
begotten of the Father, but afterwards, in time, according to his humanity, became incarnate in the world. And 
‘it was all burning in a delightful red fire’; this is the fire without the stains of aridity, mortality or darkness, 
which represents the Holy Spirit, by whom the Only Begotten of the Father was conceived in the flesh, born in 
time of the Virgin and poured out his light, truth and brightness over all the world. 

‘And the bright light flooded through all the red fire, and the red fire through all the bright light, and the 
bright light and the red fire shone together through the whole figure of the man so that they were one light in 

one strength and power.’ This means that the Father, who is supremely just uniformity, 2 is not without the Son 
or the Holy Spirit; and that the Holy Spirit, who inflames the hearts of the faithful, is not without the Father or 
the Son; and that the Son, who is the fullness of fruitfulness, is not without the Father or the Spirit; for they are 
inseparable in the majesty of divinity, because the Father is not without the Son, nor the Son without the 
Father, nor the Father or the Son without the Holy Spirit, nor the Spirit without them; so these three persons 
exist as one God in one integral divinity and majesty, and the unity of divinity thrives inseparable in the three 
persons, because divinity cannot be separated, since it remains always unchanged without any mutability. But 
the Father is revealed through the Son, the Son through the beginning of created things, and the Holy Spirit 
through the incarnate Son. How is this? It is the Father who before time engendered the Son; it is the Son 
through whom all things were created by the Father at the beginning of creation; and it is the Holy Spirit who 

appeared in the form of a dove at the baptism of the Son of God towards the end of all time.3 


3. May the human race never cease to call fervently upon the one God in three persons 

Therefore may the human race never cease to call upon me the one God in three persons, for I have revealed 
this to human beings in order that they might blaze all the more fiercely in love of me, since I sent my Son into 

the world through my love for them, just as John, my loved one, 4 witnesses, saying: 


4- John on the love of God 


‘The love of God was disclosed to us in this: that he sent his only begotten Son into the world that we may live 
through him. His love is in this, not as we loved God but that he first loved us and sent his Son as a propitiation 

for our sins.’S What does this mean? Because God loved us another salvation arose different from the one we 
had at our first origins, when we were the heirs of innocence and sanctity. For the heavenly Father revealed his 
love to us in our danger of punishment; for through his heavenly power he sent his Word alone and full of 
sanctity into the darkness of the world. And there the Word perfected all good things and through his mildness 
led us back to life. He led us back when we had been rejected for the impurity of our wrongdoing and were 
unable to return to the sanctity we had lost. What does this mean? It means that God’s loving maternal embrace 
came to us through the fountain of life; his love nourished us for life; and in times of danger his love is our help, 
a deep and gentle love leading to penitence. How is this? 

God has mercifully remembered his great work and his most precious pearl - the human being 0 - whom he 
fashioned from the soil of the earth and inspired with the breath of life. How did he do this? He drew us to life 
through penitence, which never fails in its effectiveness, because the cunning serpent deceived us through his 
proud persuasions; but God cast him down through the penitence which reveals humility, a humility which the 
devil did not know or practise, for he did not know how to raise himself up to the path of righteousness. 

Therefore the salvation of love did not originate in us, for we neither knew nor were able to love God for our 
salvation; rather, it came from our Creator and Lord, who loved his people so much that he sent his Son for our 
salvation, as leader and Saviour of the faithful, who washed all our wounds. Thus also he shed that sweet balm 
from which all the good things of our salvation flow. 

Therefore, O human creature, you too should know that God is not affected by any adverse mutability, for the 
Father is the Father, the Son is the Son, the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit; these three persons exist indivisibly in 
the unity of the godhead. How does this come about? 


5. The three powers of a stone 


There are three powers in a stone and three in a flame and three in a word. In a stone there is moist greenness, 

palpable strength and red-burning fire7 It has moist greenness so that it will not fall apart and disintegrate, and 
palpable strength so that it can provide habitation and defence, and red-burning fire so that it can be warmed 
and strengthened in its durability. Its moist greenness signifies the Father, who will never dry out or reach a 
limit to his power; its palpable strength signifies the Son, since he was born of the Virgin and could be touched 
and grasped; its red-burning fire signifies the Spirit, who is the fire and illumination of the hearts of the faithful. 
What does this all mean? 

Imagine someone who comes into contact too often with the moisture and greenness of a stone and so 

weakens and falls ill;® in the same way a foolhardy person who tries - in the instability of their thoughts - to 
look upon God will perish in their faith. Imagine a people taking the palpable strength of stones to build their 
habitations and protect themselves against their enemies; in the same way the Son of God, who is the true 
cornerstone, is the habitation of the faithful people, protecting them against evil spirits. And imagine also the 
red fire, burning bright and lighting up the darkness; in the same way the Holy Spirit puts unbelief to flight, 
removing all the rust of iniquity. 

Just as the three powers are contained within the one stone, so the true Trinity is contained within the true 
Unity. 


6. The three powers of a flame 


And just as there are three powers in the glowing heat of a flame, so the one God is in three persons. How is 
this? The flame consists of splendid brightness, purple vigour and fiery glow. It has a splendid brightness so that 
it can shine its light, a purple vigour so that it can maintain its existence, and a fiery glow so that it can burn. 
Consider the Father in the splendid brightness, for he sends out his brightness to the faithful through the 
goodness of his fatherhood; and in the purple vigour held within the flame and containing its strength, consider 
the Son, who assumed a body from the Virgin in which the godhead declared its marvels; and in the fiery glow 
perceive the Holy Spirit, who pours his fire over the minds of believers. But the flame will not be seen if there is 
no splendid brightness, or purple vigour, or fiery glow; in the same way, God is not worthily honoured in any 
place where neither the Father, Son, nor Holy Spirit is venerated. 

Therefore just as three powers are discerned in the one flame, so three persons are to be understood in the 
unity of the godhead. 



7. The three components of the human word 


Three components may be noted in the human word, just as the Trinity may be considered in the unity of the 

Godhead. How is this to be done? A word is composed of sound, force and breath. 9 A word has sound in order to 
be heard, force in order to be understood, and breath in order to be completed. In the sound of the word 
consider the Father, who expresses all things by his ineffable power; in the force of the word consider the Son, 
marvellously engendered of the Father; in the breath of the word consider the Holy Spirit, who burns gently 
within them. But if the sound is not heard, then the force does not operate and the breath is not raised; hence 
the word is not understood; because the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are not to be divided, for they function as 
one unanimous activity. 

Therefore just as there are the three components of the word so also the heavenly Trinity is in one heavenly 
unity. And just as no moist greenness can exist or function in the stone without the palpable strength or the red- 
burning flame, and no palpable strength without the moist greenness or burning flame, and no burning flame 
without moist greenness or palpable strength; and just as no splendid brightness can exist or function in the 
flame without the purple vigour or the fiery glow, and no purple vigour without the splendid brightness or the 
fiery glow, and no fiery glow without the splendid brightness or purple vigour; and just as no sound can exist or 
function in the word without force or breath, and no force without the sound or the breath, and no breath 
without the sound or the force, for they act indivisibly in unison; so also the three persons of the Trinity exist 
inseparably in the majesty of the Godhead and cannot be divided from each other. 

Human creature, understand that the one God is in three persons! But you imagine in the foolishness of your 
mind that God is so powerless that it is impossible for him truly to exist in three persons, but only barely to 

exist in one! What are you thinking? God is truly God in three persons, the first and the last. 10 


8. The unity of being 


But the Father is not without the Son, nor the Son without the Father, nor the Father without the Son and the 
Holy Spirit; nor is the Holy Spirit without them, because the three persons are inseparable in the unity of 
divinity. How is this possible? The word sounds from the mouth of a human being, but the mouth does not 
make a sound without the word, and the word itself does not sound without life. And where is the word located? 
In the human being. And where does the word come from? Again, from the human being. And how does this 
happen? Through a living human being. Thus the Son is in the Father, and he is sent by the Father to this dark 
earth for the salvation of humankind and conceived by the Virgin through the Holy Spirit. He is the only 
begotten Son in the deity and the only begotten Son in the virginity; and he is both the only Son of the Father 
and the only Son of the Mother; for just as the Father engendered him alone outside time, so the Mother 
engendered him alone inside time, and she remained a virgin after the birth. 

Therefore, O human creature, understand that there is one God in three persons, who created you in the 
strength of his divinity and who redeemed you from your lost state. Do not forget your Creator, as Solomon 
urges you, and as it is written: 



9. The words of Solomon 


‘Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, before the time of affliction comes and before the years 
approach of which you will say: I do not like them.’ 11 

What does this signify? Through your sense of reason, remember the one who created you when as it were in 
the days of your false confidence you consider it possible for you to proceed according to your desires: to raise 
yourself to the heights or plunge into the depths, to stand in prosperity or to fall in tribulation. For the sense of 

life 12 which is within you is striving continuously towards perfection until that time when it will be fulfilled. 
How is this to be understood? The child advances from her first beginnings up to full adult stature and then 
remains in a state of perfection, abandoning that boisterousness which is mere foolish behaviour; but only with 
great trouble does she now provide carefully for those things in her life which need considering but which she 
used to neglect in the foolishness of her childhood. May the faithful person behave like this! May she abandon 
the behaviour of childhood and ascend to the fullness of the virtues! May she persevere in their strength, 
rejecting the arrogant desire which simmers in the foolishness of the vices! In her trials and tribulations may 
she meditate on what is beneficial to her, just as earlier she had inclined childishly to the behaviour of 

childhood! 1 3 

Therefore, O human creature, embrace your God thus in the light of your vigour, before the hour arrives for 
the purgation of your deeds, when all things will be revealed and nothing will remain unconsidered. Then also 
all the times will flow past and will lack nothing of their fullness. In your sense of humanity you will grumble, 
saying: ‘I do not like these changeable things; I do not understand whether they will lead to prosperity or 
disaster’; for the human mind is always in doubt, because when it does good things it worries about whether 
they are pleasing to God; and when it does evil things it fears for the salvation of redemption. 

May whoever sees with watchful eyes or hears with echoing ears offer a kiss and embrace to these my 
mystical words, which are uttered by me, the Living One. 


6. Letter to Pope Eugenius III 


In the first of several letters to Pope Eugenius III, written shortly after the Synod of Trier (1147-8) and before 
the completion o/Scivias (1151), Hildegai'd alludes to the pope’s visit to Trier and expresses her concern that he 
will continue to lend his support for the book despite the opposition of many wise men of earthly inclination’. 



Hildegard to Pope Eugenius III, 1148 [Letter 2] 


Gentle Father, though a small and insignificant figure, I write to you now, in a true vision by mystical 
inspiration, on all that God wishes me to teach. 

Resplendent Father, you came to our land in your official capacity, as God willed it, and you saw something of 
the true visions which the Living Light has taught me, and you heard them in the embrace of your heart. Now 
that a part of this writing is finished, still the same Light has not left me but burns in my soul as I have had it 
since childhood. Therefore I send you now this letter in the true admonition of God. And my soul desires that 
the Light from the Light will shine within you and pour over your eyes and awaken your spirit to these writings 
so that your soul may be crowned by them, as God so wishes. But many wise men of earthly inclination have 
rejected these things, in the inconstancy of their hearts, because they come from this poor female figure who 
was formed in the rib and not taught by the philosophers. 

Father of pilgrims, hear the voice of Him who is. A strong king sat in his hall, high pillars before him covered 
in gold bands and adorned with pearls and precious stones. And the king chose to touch a tiny feather, so that it 
soared up marvellously, and a strong wind bore it up so that it did not fall. Again he speaks to you - he who is 
the Living Light shining in the heavens and in the abyss, not hidden or concealed by listening hearts. And he 

says: ‘Prepare this writing 1 to be received by those who hear me; make it green with the juice of sweetness; 
make it a branching root and a soaring leaf against the devil. Then you will live in eternity. Do not reject these 
secrets of God, for they are part of that need which is hidden and which has not yet appeared openly.’ 

May the sweetest fragrance be in you. May you never tire on the path of justice. 


STRUGGLES FOR INDEPENDENCE 


7. Songs for Saint Disibod 


The universal community of the saints was a genuinely felt reality in the lives of Hildegard and her nuns, not 
only as an example to follow but also as a source of inspiration and a focus of devotion. This was especially 
true of patron saints of the locality such as Disibod, the seventh-century Irish bishop and hermit who founded 
a monastery on the summit of the hill that later bore his name. Hildegard spent half her life on the 
Disibodenberg and must have been highly familiar with its topography. She clearly associated the heights of 
the mountain with the spiritual stature of the saint to whom she dedicated her verses. 


O mirum admirandum. Antiphon for Saint Disibod 1 


O wondrous marvel, 
a hidden form shines forth 
and rises up in glorious stature 
to where the living height 
gives forth mystical truths. 

Therefore, O Disibod, you will rise up at the end, 
as once you were raised, 
by the succouring blossom 
of all the branches of the world. 


O viriditas digiti dei. Responsory for Saint Disibod 2 

O green vigour of the hand of God, 
in which God has planted a vineyard, 
it shines in the heights 
like a stately column, 

You are glorious in your preparation for God. 

And O mountain on high 

you will never weaken in God’s testing 

but you stand far off like an exile. 

The armoured man does not have the power 
to seize you. 

You are glorious in your preparation for God. 

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. You are glorious in your preparation for God. 


8. Letter to Hartwig of Bremen 


Hartwig of Bremen was the brother of Richardis ofStade , and presumably well-known to Hildegard. 1 His 
mother, Marchioness ( Margravin ) Richardis, was related to the family offutta von Spanheim, and gave 
Hildegard her support during the preparations for the move to Rupertsberg which began in the late 11408. 
Hartwig himself became Archbishop of Bremen in 1148 and immediately began apolicy of extending the power 
and influence of his see in the north and north-east, often in direct conflict with his enemy Henry the Lion, the 
powerful Duke of Saxony and Bavaria and head of the Welf dynasty. 


Hildegardto Hartwig, Archbishop of Bremen, after 1148 [Letter 11] 


Consider the One who saw you on the first day, who gave you eyes to see with; who gave you the wings of all 
creation to fly with. Consider the One who made human beings to be a mirror to the fullness of all his miracles, 
so that the knowledge of God would shine in them, as it is written: ‘You are gods and all of you are sons of the 

most high ’. 2 May he look upon you, and direct you to his will. 

Whenever human reason imitates God, then a human being can reach God, who has neither beginning nor 
end. For God is revealed by the knowledge of good and evil. This is what the wheel of eternity is like. 

May God himself so act that you flee the evil which began on the first day, the evil which lacks all good will 
and is forever opposed to God. May he set within you the windows that shine in the heavenly Jerusalem, the 
beautiful structures of the Virtues. May he cause you to soar in God’s loving embrace. As the one on whom God 

poured his blessing said: ‘Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves to their windows?’3 

And again, consider this: I, a poor female, saw you in the light of salvation. Fulfil now the commandments of 
God, given you by his grace, and taught to you by his Holy Spirit. 


9. Song for Saint Ursula 


Hildegard reserved a special devotion for the martyrs of the faith such as Ursula, killed with her many 
companions at Cologne by the Huns during the Dark Ages, and she wrote two songs to be sung in her honour 
in church. The sequence as a type of song was intended to be inserted into the liturgy of the mass; divided into 
stanzas, its form gave scope for longer meditations on a particular theme. The exact date when the following 
sequence was composed is not known, but the lines spoken by Ursula’s detractors (’In the innocence of her 
girlish ignorance, she does not know what she is saying) have an obvious application to Hildegard and the 
opposition she experienced in the early years of her life and work. Whether consciously or unconsciously, 
Hildegard may have identified with the pilgrim Ursula in her own plans for departure to a new community at 
the Rupertsberg. 


O Ecclesia oculi tui. Sequence 1 

O Church, your eyes are like sapphire, 2 

and your ears like Mount Bethel, 3 

your nose is like a mountain of myrrh and incense, 4 

your mouth the sound of many waters.5 

In a vision of true faith, 

Ursula loved the Son of God, 

she abandoned husband and worldly life 

and gazed at the sun, 

calling the fair youth and saying: 

‘I have eagerly desired* 

to come to you at the heavenly nuptials 

and sit with you, 

running to you on the pilgrim way like a cloud^ 
racing through the purest air like a sapphire.’ 

And after Ursula had said this, 
a rumour went through the people. 

And they said: ‘In the innocence of her girlish ignorance, 
she does not know what she is saying.’ 

And they began to make fun of her, 

singing their songs, ^ 

until the fiery burden fell on her. 

Then they all acknowledged her, 

for rejection of the world is like Mount Bethel. 

And they acknowledged also 


the pleasant fragrance of myrrh and incense, 
since rejection of the world had descended upon all. 

Then the devil sent out his troops 

to murder the most noble behaviour in their bodies. 

And all the elements heard this with a loud cry 
and they shouted before the throne of God: 

‘Alas the red of the Lamb’s innocent blood 
has flowed 
at this betrothal.’ 

May all the heavens hear, 

may they praise the Lamb of God in highest harmony, 
because the ancient serpent’s throat 

has been choked with necklace of pearls^ 
made of the material of the Word of God . 10 


io. The Trials of the Soul (from Scivias I, 4) 


The first few chapters o/Scivias I, 4 form a separate section prior to a discussion of the physiology of human 
conception and Church teachings on marriage. Two of the chapter titles describe the text as ‘the lament of the 
soul on thepath of error but returning through the grace of God to her mother Zion’ (eh. 1) and ‘thewings of 
the soul’ (eh. 2), both of which give some indication of the theme. It is tempting to see a link between the 
spiritual states symbolized in this story and Hildegard’s own tribulations as she gradually gained recognition 
as a writer and spiritual leader. She returned to a similar plot for her drama ofAnima (Soul) in the Play of the 
Virtues (13). The theme of the runaway daughter is also of interest, for it links the story to the later departures 
of Richardis and Adelheid (12). 

The accompanying illustration in the Rupertsberg manuscript shows, in its mainframe, a golden light 
pouring life into a woman’s womb. To the right of the larger picture is a vertical row of five smaller framed 
pictures depicting the soul in her tent, the soul threatened by a torrent of waters on a mountain peak, the soul 
afflicted by scorpion creatures, the soul in a wine-press, and the soul being led out to eat with pigs. All of these 
scenes form part of the symbolic drama of the soul as told in the text here. 

1-2. The lament of the soul 

Where am I in my exile? 1 In the shadow of death. What is this path I am walking on? The path of error. And 
what comfort do I have? The comfort of pilgrims. 

I was to have had a tent, a tabernacle 2 decorated with five square stones that shone brighter than the sun and 
the stars. And the stones were to shine not with the rising sun and stars but with the glory of the angels. Its 

foundations were to be topaz, with gemstones^ for its roof and walls. Its steps were to be covered with crystal 
and its streets paved with gold. I was to be the companion of angels! 

For I am the living breath4 which God breathed into the dry dust of the earth. And so I was to know God and 
to feel God. 

But what misfortune! When the tent of my body realized that it could cast its eyes in all directions it pitched 

itself towards the north. 5 Abomination! There I was captured and robbed of my sight and joy of knowledge. All 
my garments were torn to shreds! 

And so I was drummed out of my inheritance. My captors dragged me to this place of exile without beauty or 
honour. They threw me into slavery. They beat me with their fists and made me eat with the pigs. 7 They sent me 

to a desert place and gave me bitter herbs to eat dipped in honey. Then they laid me in a wine-press^ and 
subjected me to many torments. They pulled off my clothes, striking me with many blows and sending me out to 
hunt. 

And I was made to catch all manner of evil and venomous worms, like scorpions and vipers, which sprayed 
me all over with their poison till I sickened with weakness. They mocked me then and said, ‘Where is your 
honour now?’ 

I trembled all over, groaning in my misery, and I said: Where am I? Oh where have I come from? What 
comfort can I look for in this captivity? How can I break these chains? What eye can see my wounds and what 
nostrils can bear the stench of this affliction? What hand can anoint my wounds with oil? Who will ever show 
me mercy in my pain? 

May Heaven hear my cry! May the Earth tremble at my misery and all that live on her have pity for my 
captivity! I am oppressed by bitter pains, for I am a pilgrim without comfort or support. Who will console me, 
for my mother has left me because I strayed from the way of salvation. None will help me but God! 

Oh Zion, my mother, when I remember how I would have dwelt with you, then I look at this bitter captivity 

into which I have been thrown! And when I recall all the harmonies of music9 within you, then I can only 
consider my wounds. And when I remember the joys and delights of your glory, then I curse these poisons with 
which they are polluted. 


Where shall I turn? Where shall I run to? My pain is immeasurable, since if I remain in this evil plight, I will 
be a companion to them - the ones I knew shamefully in the country of Babylon. Where are you, Zion my 
mother? What misfortune! If only I had not left you! I could bear this pain more easily if I did not know you. 

Now I shall flee these evil companions! Wretched Babylon has loaded me with weights of lead; she oppresses 
me with heavy timbers so that I can scarcely breathe. But when I cry out to you, my mother, in my tears, 
wretched Babylon pours forth a crashing sound of rushing waters so that you cannot hear my voice. In great 
trouble, therefore, I will seek the narrow ways. And so I will escape my evil companions and my miserable 
captivity! 

When I had spoken these words, I ran down the narrow path and hid myself in a small cave towards the 
north, weeping bitterly since I had lost my mother. Here too I considered all my pain and all my wounds. Here I 
cried and wept, pouring out my tears so that all the pain and malice of my wounds were flooded with my tears. 

Suddenly, a pleasant fragrance touched my nostrils, like a gentle breeze sent to me from my mother. What 
sighs I uttered and what tears I shed when I felt that modicum of comfort! I cried and wept such tears of joy 
that even the mountain was moved in whose cave I had hidden. 

And I said, ‘O mother, mother Zion! What will become of me? Where is your noble daughter now? For how 
long, for how long will I be without your motherly tenderness, without the great delight and joy with which you 
bring me up?’ With these tears I was as glad as if I had actually seen my mother. 

But my enemies heard my cries and said, ‘Where is our companion whom we have had until now to do 
everything we desired? Look how she calls on the citizens of heaven! Let us employ all our skills to guard her 
with great care and attention so that she cannot escape us! Remember we had her completely in our power! If 
we do this, then she will follow us again.’ 

But I slipped out quietly from the cave where I had been hiding. I aimed to climb so high that my enemies 
could not find me. But they released such a sea of raging water against me that there was no way I could get over 
it. There was a bridge, but it was so small and narrow that I could not cross it. And on the other shore of the sea 
the mountains were so tall and jagged that I could not journey there either. And I said, ‘What can a poor 
creature do now? For a little while I was able to feel the benevolent presence of my mother, and I thought she 
would lead me back to her. But now she has deserted me! Where am I to turn? If I turn back now to my former 
captivity, my enemies will mock me more than ever before! I cried to my mother in tears and felt her sweet 
presence, but now she has abandoned me again!’ 

But I had been given strength by the sweet comforting influence of my mother which I had felt before. So 
now I turned to the east and set out again on the narrow paths. The paths were so full of thorns and briars and 
other obstacles that I could hardly make any headway. Eventually, with much effort and stress, I made my way 
through, though almost breathless with exhaustion from my labours. 

Tired and exhausted as I was, I at last reached the summit of the mountain in which I had previously hidden, 
and made my way towards a gully where I had to descend. But there I stopped and looked. Vipers, scorpions, 
lizards and various other species of reptile were hissing their tongues at me and blocking the way down! 

‘Mother, where are you?’ I screamed in my terror. ‘I could have borne this pain more easily if I’d never felt 
your presence before. Now I’ll be thrown into captivity again where I was kept for so long! Where is your help 
now?’ 

It was then that I heard my mother’s voice speaking to me, ‘Run, my daughter, run, for you have been granted 
wings to fly with by the great Giver whom none can resist. Quickly, therefore, fly over all these creatures 
opposing you.’ And then, with a great feeling of comfort and release, I took up my wings and flew quickly over 
those venomous and death-dealing vipers. 


3 .The tabernacle 

And I came to a tabernacle, the inside of which was made of the hardest steel. And entering in, I performed 
works of light where before I had done deeds of darkness. 

In this tabernacle, therefore, towards the north, I set up a pillar of unpolished iron on which I hung small 
fans of various feathers moving back and forth. I found manna, and I ate it. 

Towards the east I built a fortification of square stones, kindling a fire within. Here I drank myrrh-flavoured 
wine with grape-must. 



Towards the south I made a tower of square stones on which I hung red shields; in the windows I placed 
trumpets of ivory. And in the middle of the tower I poured out honey and prepared a precious ointment of 
various spices, so that its strong fragrance permeated all of the tabernacle. 

Towards the west, however, I did no work, since that part was turned towards the world. 

But while I was occupied with this labour, my enemies took up their quivers and attacked my tabernacle with 
their arrows. Because of the zeal with which I was doing my work, I did not notice the frenzy of their attacks 
until the door of the tabernacle was filled with arrows. Nevertheless none of their arrows was able to pierce the 

door or the steel covering of the tabernacle, and so I could not be harmed by them. 10 

Seeing this, they sent a great torrent of waters to throw me down with my tabernacle, but they achieved 
nothing with their evil actions. Without any fear now, I derided them for their failure and said, ‘The Craftsman 
who made this tabernacle is stronger and wiser than you are. Gather up your arrows therefore and take them 
away, for they cannot give you the victory you desire. Look and see: they have caused no injury!’ 

‘I have fought many wars against you in great hardship and pain. You tried to bring me to my death but were 
unable, for I was armed with the most powerful of weapons; I brandished sharp swords against you and 
defended myself vigorously. Depart, therefore, and leave me, for you can do nothing more against me!’ 

7. How anger, hatred and pride are overcome 

When anger is about to burn up my tabernacle, I look to the goodness of God, whom anger has never touched, 
and so I become softer than the air which waters the dry earth with its sweetness. Then the virtues and powers 
manifest the force of their green vigour within me, and spiritual joy is mine! In this way I feel the goodness of 
God! 

But when hatred attempts to defame me, I look to the mercy and the pain of God’s Son, and so I contain my 
flesh, receiving the sweet fragrance of roses from the thorns which grew up in memory of the Faithful One. In 
this way I acknowledge my Saviour! 

And when pride 11 strives to build without a firm foundation rock and raise up his tower of vanity within me, 
and when he is about to reach a great height that none can equal, and when I appear higher than the others: oh, 
who will come to my aid? This is the ancient serpent wishing to be greater than all! It is he who has fallen into 
death and is trying now to throw me down with him! In great sadness then I say: ‘Where is my king and my 
God? What good can I do without God? No good!’ 

And I look to the God who gave me life, and I run to the blessed Virgin who toppled the cave of pride of the 

ancient serpent. 12 In this way I become a strong stone in God’s building. And the ravenous wolf who expired on 
the hook of divinity can no longer overcome me. And in this way I acknowledge the sweetest good, that is 
humility, in the height of God. I taste the savour of unfading balsam and rejoice in the sweetness of God, as if I 
was inside the fragrance of all fragrances! In this way also I repel the other vices with the strong shield of 
humility. 


12. The words of Ezekiel 

‘Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a 

new spirit.’ 1 ^ You who travel the paths of the Sun which the blessed sheep walk! You who would persevere on 
the path of justice! Cast away from the knowledge of your hearts the study of forbidden things that do not 
benefit the wisdom of the king. You think to soar to the heights of vanity, while you plunge to the depths of the 
sea, where there is no goodness, where the fearful horror dwells that does not know God. Cast away such things, 
and you will walk to your salvation on the way of truth. In your hearts then you will bear the glory of the dawn 
and the breath of new life. 


II. Songs for Saint Rupert 


According to the Life of Hildegard by Gottfried of Disibodenberg and Theoderich of Echternach, the call to 
move from Disibodenberg came to Hildegard in a vision , accompanied by a bout of illness in which she 
remained until she consented to reveal what the vision had said to her. The place to which she felt called was 
the Rupertsberg , or Mount St Rupert, a site on a large hill overlooking what is now the modern town of Bingen 
in the Rhine Valley. At the time of Hildegard’s move in 1150, there was just an old ruined chapel dedicated to 
the eighth-century saint, while the rest of the area was cultivated as a vineyard. Rupert’s original monastery 
had been destroyed by the Vikings in about 882, the foolish men’ alluded to in the sequence O Jerusalem below. 
Perhaps not surprisingly, given the popular appeal of hagiography , Rupert became greatly honoured as the 
patron saint of the new monastery, and Hildegard, who also wrote a Life of Saint Rupert, was active in 
furthering his cult and veneration. As she saw it, Rupert’s life was short but inspiring, a fact that emerges in 
the themes of the two antiphons and the second stanza of the sequence below. With echoes of dedication hymns 
in its text, it is possible that this sequence was sung at the ceremony for the dedication of the new church on the 
Rupertsberg which probably took place on 1 May 1151. 


Ofelix apparicio. Antiphon for St Rupert 1 


O joyful sight 

when in Rupert, friend of God, 
a flame of light ignited, 
and the love of God 
flowed in his heart 

embracing the fear of the Lord. 
So also his fame 
has flourished among 
the citizens of heaven. 


O beatissime Ruperte. Antiphon for St Rupert 2 


Blessed Rupert, 

who in the bloom of your age 

did not produce or bear 

the vices of the devil, 

but left this shipwrecked world: 

intercede now 

for your servants in God. 

Alleluia. 


O Jerusalem. Sequence for St Rupert 3 


O Jerusalem, city of gold4 
decorated with the purple of the King, 

O edifice of the highest good, 

you are a light that has never been obscured, 


decorated with the dawn, in the heat of the sun. 5 

O blessed boyhood, reddening in the dawn, 
and O blessed youth, burning in the sun. 

You, noble Rupert, 
shone in these like a gemstone 
that can never be concealed 
by foolish men, 

just as a mountain cannot be hidden by the valley below. 

Your windows, Jerusalem, 
wonderfully decorated 
with topaz and sapphire. 

Among these you shine, O Rupert, 

you are not hidden from lukewarm morals, 

just as the mountain, 

crowned with roses, lilies and purple blooms 
is clearly seen from the valley in a true revelation. ^ 

O soft flower of the field 
O green vigour of the sweet apple 
O weightless burden 

that does not involve the heart in evil deeds. 

O noble vessel 

unpolluted and unconsumed 
by the dance in the ancient cave, 
unweakened 

by the wounds of the ancient enemy. 

In you the Holy Spirit sings in harmony 
since you have joined the angelic choirs, 
decorated by God’s Son 
and faultless. 

You are a vessel of beauty, O Rupert, 

in your boyhood and youth you longed for God 

in awe of God and in Love’s embrace 7 
in the lovely odour of righteous deeds. 

O Jerusalem, your foundations were laid 
with glowing gemstones 
from publicans and sinners, 
lost sheep found by God’s Son, 


they ran to you and were placed in you. 

Then your walls gleamed with living gemstones 
which through the highest zeal of good will 

soared like clouds in the sky.^ 

And your towers, O Jerusalem, 
gleam and shine 

with the red and incandescent brightness of the saints 
and with all the glories of God 
in which you abound, O Jerusalem. 

O citizens of Jerusalem, 

decorated and crowned, 

and you, O Rupert, their companion there, 

assist us, your maidservants, as we labour in exile. 


12. The Departure of Richardis of Stade 


With the various difficulties faced by the new community, some of the nuns decided to leave the Rupertsberg, 
sometimes for positions elsewhere. In 1151 Richardis of Stade was appointed abbess ofBassum, in the diocese 
of Bremen, where her brother was Archbishop. Hildegard,for various reasons, including her personal affection 
for Richardis, opposed the appointment. A delegation from Bremen appealed to Archbishop Heinrich of Mainz, 
the diocese in which the Rupertsberg belonged. When ordered by Heinrich to release Richardis, Hildegard sent 

the following response (Letter 18R). 1 Eventually forced to submit, she sent a grieving letter to Richardis 
herself, now installed at Bassum. 2 


Hildegardto Heinrich, Archbishop of Mainz, 1151 [Letter i8]R 

The clear fountain which is just and not false says this: 

These legal pretexts brought in order to obtain authority over this girl are useless before God, for I am the 
height and the depth, the circle and the descending light. I did not compose or choose these pretexts, which have 
been issued by the conniving presumption of ignorant hearts. May all the faithful hear them with the open ears 
of their hearts, and not with the ears that hear outwardly, like animals taking in the sound but not the word. 

The Spirit of God says in his zeal;3 ‘Shepherds! Weep and lament for these times, for you do not know what 
you are doing when you scatter the offices founded in God in favour of opportunities to make money and the 
human wickedness of evil men who do not have the fear of the Lord.’ 

Therefore, your curses and your malicious and threatening words are not to be heeded. Your rod and staff 
have been raised in pride, not in God’s service but in the weak presumption of your wicked desires. 


Hildegard to Richardis, 1151-2 [Letter 64] 


Hear me, my daughter, speaking to you in the Spirit. My grief rises up. That grief is obliterating the great 
confidence and consolation which I had from another human being. From now on I will say, ‘It is good to trust 

in the Lord, rather than to trust in princes.’4 Which means that a human being must look to the living height 
without being obscured by love or by the weakness of faith, which the aerial humour of the earth can have only 
for a short period. Anyone who looks to God in this way can turn their eyes to the sun like an eagle. A man 
should not wait upon a person of high rank who fails him like a flower that withers; but I broke this rule in my 
love for a certain noble human being. 

Now I say to you this: whenever I sinned in that way, God made my sin known to me, either in hardships or 
sufferings, just as he has done about you, as you yourself realize. 

Now I have this to say also. Alas for me, a mother and alas for me, a daughter. Why have you forsaken me like 
an orphan? I loved you for your noble bearing, your wisdom, your purity, your soul and all your life! So much so 
that many people said, ‘What are you doing?’ 

May all who have a grief like mine mourn with me; all who in their love of God have had the same affection 
of heart and mind for another human being as I have felt for you - who were snatched away from me at a 
moment’s notice. 

Nevertheless, may the angel of God go before you and the Son of God protect you. May his Mother watch over 
you. 

And remember me, your mother Hildegard, so that your happiness will not fade. 


13. The First Version of The Play of the Virtues (from Scivias III, 13) 


This dialogue, the first Morality play in medieval literature, occurs with other songs as part of the triumphant 
finale to Hildegard’s Scivias. Like ‘The Trials of the Soul’ (10), it tells the story of the flight, oppression by 
enemies, and eventual return of the errant soul. Its basic thematic structure is an allegory in which the various 
moral qualities in the human being are conceived and externalized as active forces, the ‘virtutes’ or, as the 
meaning of the Latin word implies, the ‘virtues and powers.’ Not yet as fully developed as the Ordo virtutum 

(Play of the Virtues) of 1158, 1 since its list of characters is shorter and there is less dramatic breadth, it is 
perhaps more suitable for reading than the later performance piece. Arguably, there is a stronger focus on the 
plight ofAnima, the personified soul, as she struggles to free herself from the wiles of the deceiver. 

The exact date of the first version of the play is not known, although Abbess Tengswich ofAndemach may be 
referring to aperformance of the play in a letter dated 1148-50. One of the letter’s criticisms is of Hildegard’s 
unusual liturgical practices, for after a respectful opening, Tengswich continues: 

But a report of something unusual in your practices has also reached us. On feast days, your nuns stand in 
church chanting psalms with unbound hair and for decorative purposes wear long white silk veils which reach 
down to the ground. On their heads they wear crowns of woven gold in which crosses have been placed on each 
side and at the back, while a figure of the lamb is placed neatly at the front. And they adorn their fingers with 
golden rings. And they do this although the first shepherd of the Church forbade such things in his epistle, 

saying that women are to dress ‘with propriety, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or expensive clothes’. 2 

Since Scivias itself was completed in 1151, about the time that Richardis and others were leaving the 
community at the Rupertsberg it is at least possible that those external events influenced the contents of the 
first official written version of the work. But the play is more than a series of allegorized events from the 
author’s biography. Original as a work of literature, its sources include the liturgy, the Bible, particularly the 
Song of Songs, and the Psychomachia (or Struggle of the Soul) by the late Roman poet Prudentius, in which the 
final triumph of the soul is also brought about by the virtues seizing the enemy, Discord, and so defeating him. 

9. For the encouragement of the virtues and the contradiction of the wiles of the devil 

And again that sound was heard, like the voice of a multitude, for the exhortation of the virtues to assist 
humankind, for the contradiction of the hostile devices of the devil, for the defeat of the vices by the virtues and 
the return of men and women to penance by divine inspiration. The sound rang out in harmony as follows. 

[THE VIRTUES:] 

We virtues are in God 
and remain in God. 

We fight for the King of kings 
dividing good from evil. 

We appeared at the first battle 
and gained the victory, 

while he who wished to soar above himself fell to the ground. 

And so we fight now 

and come to the aid of all who call upon us: 
we trample the devices of the devil 
and we lead those who wish to follow us 
to the blessed mansions. 


THE COMPLAINT OF THE SOULS, LOCATED IN THE FLESH: 


We wayfarers! 

What have we done, wandering into sins? 

We should have been the daughters of the King 
but fell into the shadow of sins! 

O living Sun, 

transport us on your shoulders 
into that most just inheritance 
which we lost in Adam! 

0 King of kings, 3 

we fight in your battle. 

PRAYER OF THE FAITHFUL SOUL: 

Sweet divinity, 
delightful Life 

in which I will wear a bright garment, 
accepting what I lost at my first appearance, 

1 sigh for you, and I invoke all the virtues. 

RESPONSE OF THE VIRTUES: 

Happy soul, 

beautiful creature of God, 

you are formed in the profound depths of the wisdom of God, 4 
you express love in great measure.5 

THE FAITHFUL SOUL: 

Oh let me come to you with gladness, 

that you may bestow on me the kiss of your heart! ^ 

VIRTUES: 

Daughter of the King, 
we must join you in the fight. 

THE SOUL, DEJECTED, LAMENTS: 

What grievous distress, what a heavy weight 

I bear in the garment of this life, 

since it is too hard for me to fight against the flesh. 

VIRTUES: 

O soul, formed by the will of God, 

O happy instrument, 

why are you so weak when you face 

what God defeated through the nature of the Virgin? 

In us you are bound to conquer the devil! 

SOUL: 

Give me your support and help me 


to stand firm! 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD SPEAKS TO THE SOUL: 

Look to the garment you wear, 
daughter of salvation! 

Be strong, 

and you will never fall. 

THE SOUL: 

I do not know what I will do or where I will flee! 

This is hard for me: I cannot bring to perfection 
the garment in which I am clothed. 

I would rather cast it from me! 

VIRTUES: 

Unhappy Mind! 

Distressed Soul! 

Why do you hide your face before your Creator?? 

KNOWLEDGE OF GOD TO THE SOUL: 

You do not know him, 
you do not see or taste 
the One who made you. 

SOUL: 

God created the world: 

I am not doing him any harm, 

I simply want to enjoy it! 

THE DEVIL TEMPTS THE SOUL: 

You labour foolishly, foolishly! 

How does it benefit you? 

Look to the world, 

and it will embrace you in great honour! 

VIRTUES: 

Alas, alas.^ 

Virtues, let us grieve and mourn 

because the sheep of the Lord has fled this life! 9 

HUMILITY: 

I, Humility, queen of the virtues, say this: 

Come to me, virtues, 

and I will empower you to recover the lost drachma 10 
and crown the happy soul in her perseverance. 11 


VIRTUES: 

0 glorious Queen, most delightful intermediary, 
we come rejoicing. 

HUMILITY: 

For this reason, my dearly beloved daughters, 

1 hold a place for you in the royal marriage chamber. 2 

0 daughters of Israel, 

God awakened you under the apple tree. 1 ^ 

At this time, therefore, remember his planting of the seed. 

Rejoice, daughters of Zion! 

THE DEVIL’S LOUD NOISE TO HUMILITY AND THE OTHER VIRTUES: 

What is this power, 

as if there were none beside God alone? 1 5 

It is I that tell you this: 

whoever will follow me and my will, 

1 will give them everything. 1 ^ 

As for you and your followers, 
you have nothing to give! 

Why, none of you 

even know who you are! 

HUMILITY RESPONDS: 

In truth I and my companions know 
that you are the ancient dragon. 

You wished to fly higher than the highest, 
until God himself threw you into the abyss. 

VIRTUES: 

And as for all of us, we live in the heights! 

THE LAMENT OF THE PENITENT SOUL, IN THE BODY, CALLING ON THE VIRTUES: 1 ? 
Royal Virtues! 

How beautiful and bright you are in the height of the sun. 

And how sweet is your habitation. 

And how terrible for me that I have fled from you! 

VIRTUES: 

Return, fugitive! Return to us, 
and God will receive you! 

THE PENITENT SOUL IN THE BODY: 

Ah, I have been swallowed up by the terrible sweetness of sins! 

I have not dared to return! 


VIRTUES: 

Do not fear and do not flee, 

for you are the lost sheep whom the Good Shepherd 1 ' 5 is seeking. 

THE PENITENT SO UL IN THE BODY: 

Now I need you to receive me back, 

because I stink from the wounds 

with which the ancient serpent has defiled me. 

VIRTUES: 

Run to us, 

follow the footsteps in which you will never fall 
with us as your companions, 
and God will heal you. 

THE PENITENT SO UL IN THE BODY: 

I am a sinner who fled from Life: 

covered with sores 1 9 I return to you, 

that you may offer me the shield of redemption. 

VIRTUES: 

Runaway soul, be strong, 
and put on the armour of light. 

THE PENITENT SOUL IN THE BODY: 

You, all the cohort of the Queen, 
and you, the white lilies and red roses, 
bend down to me, 

because I exiled myself from you as a wayfaring stranger, 
and help me, that I may rise up through the blood of God’s Son. 
Humility, true healer, 
give me your help, 

for Pride has broken me with many vices 
and afflicted me with many scars. 

I flee to you now: 
therefore receive me! 

HUMILITY TO THE VIRTUES: 

All you virtues, 

receive this sinner in mourning, with all her scars, 
for the sake of the wounds of Christ, 
and lead her to me. 

VIRTUES TO THE PENITENT SOUL IN THE BODY: 

We will take you back 
and we will not desert you, 


and all the host of heaven will be glad for you : 20 
now is the time to sound forth in harmony . 21 

HUMILITY TO THE PENITENT SO UL: 

Unhappy daughter, I will embrace you: 

the great healer has suffered hard and bitter wounds 

for your sake. 

DEVIL: 

Who are you? Where have you come from? 

You embraced me, 
and I led you out. 

Now you confound me in your reversal, 
but I will throw you down in my struggle! 

PENITENT SOUL REJECTING THE DEVIL: 

When I realized all your ways were evil 
I fled from you, 
but now, deceiver, 

I fight against you. 

PENITENT SOUL TO HUMILITY: 

Therefore, Queen Humility, 
help me with your medicine! 

HUMILITY, TO VICTORY AND THE OTHER VIRTUES: 
Victory, who once conquered him in Heaven! 

Run with your soldiers 
and all of you bind the devil! 

VICTORY, TO THE VIRTUES: 

Come, strong and glorious soldiers! 

Help me defeat the deceiver! 

VIRTUES TO VICTORY: 

Gentle warrior in the rushing water from the source 
which swallowed up the ravenous wolf! 

Glorious crown-bearer! 

Gladly we will fight with you against that deceiver. 

HUMILITY TO THE VIRTUES: 

Bind him therefore, 
shining Virtues! 

VIRTUES: 

We will obey you, our Queen 


and fulfill your commands in all things. 


VICTORY: 

Rejoice, my companions, 

that the ancient serpent is bound! 

VIRTUES: 

Praise to you, Christ, King of the angels! 

O God, who are you that 

contained in yourself that great counsel 

which destroyed the hellish potion 

among publicans and sinners 

who now shine in the eternal light of goodness! 

Praise to you, therefore, O King! 

Father Almighty, 

from whom the river flowed in a fiery blaze, 

lead your sons and daughters to sail the waters with a good wind 

so that thus we may bring them 

to the heavenly Jerusalem. 



THE SIBYL OF THE RHINE 


14. Three Political Letters 


As Hildegard became established at Rupertsberg, she began to gain a reputation for prophecy and political 
wisdom as well as theological understanding, and it was in this role as adviser and prophetess that she became 
known as the ‘Sibyl of the Rhine’. Soon her direct advice was being sought, and given, in the current affairs of 
the German Empire and the Church. The letters here, though difficult to date precisely, illustrate aspects of this 
activity. 

The letter to Pope Eugenius III is markedly different in tone from her earlier one to the same correspondent 
(6); the language is more apocalyptic, with the sword of divine justice circling in the air, and there is some 
intriguing animal imagery. It is tempting to relate the image of the bear to the new king of Germany, Frederick 
Barbarossa, who signed a political agreement with Eugenius at the Treaty of Constance in 1153. 

The letter to Henry (Bishop of Liege 1145-64) is similarly urgent, with its imagery of dark clouds ominously 
threatening the mountain of flowers and gentle breezes. The dark clouds are a less precise kind of metaphor 
than that of the bear, but the implication is that the Church is somehow threatened. Henry was loyal to 
Barbarossa and took part in the first Italian expedition of 1154, attending the Emperor’s coronation by Pope 
Hadrian IV in 1155. 

Hadrian IV was an Englishman and vigorous politician who at first honoured the Treaty of Constance by 
ousting the leader of the Senate, Arnold of Brescia, from Rome and by crowning Barbarossa as Emperor. But 
his agreement with King William I of Norman Sicily in 1156 brought a radical change of policy. In October 1157 
a letter from Hadrian, delivered by his legates to the Diet of Besanqon, provoked a bitter row with Barbarossa 
and his chancellor Rainald Dassel, who interpreted its requirements as a threat to imperial power. Hildegard’s 
letter to Hadrian presents a series of apocalyptic images and metaphors which, although bafflingly unclear, are 
of undoubted relevance to the events of Hadrian’s pontificate. 



Hildegardto Pope Eugenius III, 1148-53 [Letters] 

He who is not silent speaks - because of the weakness of those who are too blind to see, too deaf to hear, too 

dumb to speak - that robbers lie in wait by night 1 with death-dealing weapons! And what does he say? The 
sword circles and turns, killing those who are evil in mind! 

You in your person are a shining breastplate, 2 the primary root, the presider at Christ’s nuptials with the 
Church. But you are divided in your attentions. On the one hand your soul is renewed in the mystic flower that 

is the companion of virginity/ on the other, you are the branch of the Church.4 Listen to the One who strikes 
with his name and flows in the torrent; listen to him speaking to you: do not cast the eye from the eye, do not 
cut off the light from the light; but stand on the even path, lest you be accused for the sake of those souls who 
have been placed in your bosom. Do not allow them to sink in the lake of perdition through the power of the 
feasting prelates! 

A jewel lies on the path, but a bear5 comes along. Seeing the beautiful jewel, he stretches out a paw to seize it 
and place it in his bosom. But suddenly an eagle appears, snatches the jewel, wraps it in the cover of his wings 
and bears it away to the inner courtyard of the palace of the king. That very jewel shines out its radiance in the 

presence of the king. And for love of the jewel, the king presents the eagle with golden shoes/ praising him 
highly for his goodness. 

You now, the viceroy of Christ, seated on the throne of the Church, choose for yourself the better part/ that 
you may be the eagle overcoming the bear! Adorn the inner courtyard of the Church in the souls entrusted to 
you, so that in your golden shoes you may come to the heights and remove yourself far from the intruder’s 
grasp! 


Hildegardto Henry, Bishop of Liege, 1148-53 [Letter 37R] 

The living light says: the paths of the scriptures lead directly to the high mountain, 9 where the flowers grow and 
the costly aromatic herbs; where a pleasant wind blows, bringing forth their powerful fragrance; where the roses 
and lilies reveal their shining faces. But because of the shadows of dark living air, that mountain did not appear 
until the Son of the most High had enlightened the world. On that day, the sun rose from the dawn, illuminating 
this world so that all the people could see its aromatic herbs. That day was very beautiful, and sweet tidings 
came forth. 

But O shepherds, now is the time for mourning and weeping, because in our time the mountain has been 
covered with a very black cloud so that it no longer sends forth its gentle fragrance. You, Henry, must be a good 
shepherd, noble of character. And just as the eagle gazes at the sun, ponder and consider how you can call back 
the wanderers and exiles and bring some light to this mountain, so that you will live, and so that you will hear 

the most loving voice of the Judge on high: ‘Well done, good and faithful servant.’ 10 Then your soul will shine 
with light like a soldier brilliant in the fight, who rejoices with his comrades because he has gained the victory. 
Therefore, teacher of the people, fight for the good victory. Correct those in error, and so wash the mud from 

the beautiful pearls. 11 Prepare them for the high king. Let your mind pant with great eagerness to call those 
pearls back to the mountain where the gift of God had its origin. May God protect you now and free your soul 
from eternal punishment. 


Hildegard to Pope Hadrian IV, 1155 [Letter 9] 


The one who gives life to the living says this. O man, you will sustain the fearful rage of lionesses and the great 
strength of leopards. You will experience shipwreck in the taking of spoils. For you have been given over to all 
those who seek refuge with you in their state of exhaustion. Nevertheless you have a ready understanding with 
which to pit yourself against the fierce behaviour of men. In raging at them you hang on firmly to the manes of 
the galloping horses which run ceaselessly along the tracks of plunder. But you fight against yourself when at 
times you favour the apparent probity of certain people if you hide the treasure-chests of those killed in conflict 
on the open roads. Therefore you will suffer a fierce battle. But you will destroy the movable goods of the rest, 

who will fall into the pit because of their asperity. Yet you have the power of the strong key , 12 which does not go 
willingly in the form of a ruby to the Feast of Unleavened Bread. 

In your heart, therefore, seek the salvation of waters so that you do not fall into the whirlwind, and so that 
you may remain gentle to the distress and pain of those who are afflicted by the torment of many wounds, thus 

imitating your Saviour, who will redeem you. And God will not leave you, 1 ^ but you will see in his lighted 


15. Songs for the Dedication of a Church 


The first of the following antiphons was perhaps written in 1155 If Hildegard wrote the song for the dedication 
of a particular church building its identity is unknown, but the ‘church’ twice mentioned in the text must also 
be seen as the universal Church, facing its enemies the ‘most savage wolf and the ‘cunning serpent’ (i.e. the 
devil). In the second antiphon, the serpent is defeated and the Church can rejoice in harmony that all its 
children have been reunited. The imagery could be understood on a number of levels, from a survey of 
salvation history on one level to a prediction of the last things on another. In view of the animal imagery in the 
letter to Pope Hadrian IV, it may be that the ‘wolf ofO virgo ecclesia represents a particular threat to the 
Church at the time when the song was composed, one possibility being the threat to papal supremacy of the still 

powerful Roman Commune under Arnold of Brescia. 1 The threat was removed by the Pope’s own swift actions 
after his election to the papal see in December 1154. Shortly before Easter in 1155, when one of the cardinals 
was attacked and wounded by Arnold’s followers, Hadrian placed an interdict over the whole of the population 
of Rome, shutting all the churches until Arnold and his party had been banished from Rome. Under pressure 
from the citizens and clergy, the Senate agreed, and the Pope was able to celebrate Easter in triumph. 

O virgo ecclesia. Antiphon 


O virgin church, you must lament 

that the most savage wolf 

has seized your children from your side. 

Woe to the cunning serpent! 

But how precious is the blood of the Saviour! 

In the banner of the king3 

he has pledged the Church to himself 

so that she now seeks her children. 


Nunc gaudeant. Antiphon4 

May the maternal heart of the Church now rejoice 
that her sons have been gathered to her lap 
in heavenly harmony. 

Therefore, shameful serpent, you are confounded, 
because those you thought were in your heart 
now shine in the blood of God’s son. 

Praise to you, King on high, alleluia. 


i6. Teachings on the Church (from Scivias) 


The principles on which Hildegard based her advice and admonitions to the principal churchmen and 
politicians of her day are set out extensively in the pages of Scivias, from which the following extracts are 
taken. The book was much in demand: in the early 1150s, for instance, Archbishop Arnold of Cologne expressed 

a wish to have a copy, for he was ‘unable and unwilling to be without it’. 1 In responding to his request, 
Hildegard sent the following message as a covering letter: 

Now, as you wished, shepherd of your people, I (a poor woman) have sent you my writings of the true visions to 
you. They contain nothing of human ingenuity and nothing of my own will. Instead, these writings contain the 
things which the Unceasing Light wished and desired to make known through its own composition and in its 
own words. Even this letter which I am writing to you now was composed not by my own reason but by 
heavenly disposition. 

Within the ‘writings of the true visions’, as Hildegard called them, Archbishop Arnold would have found much 
of practical use, for her teachings on the Church cover not only theological and doctrinal issues but also social 
matters and questions relating to ethics. Hildegard has much to say on the sacraments, the role of the monastic 
orders, and the duties of priests and bishops. She uses characteristic vocabulary, such as ‘perfumes’ for priests, 
and adapts images and stories from the Bible, such as the theme of the ‘green garden’, employed here to attack 
the frequent twelfth-century practice of dedicating young children against their will to the monastic life. 

The words of Isaiah [Scivias I, 4, 32] 

‘The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it has lighted upon Israel.’ 2 This means that the Word, through whom all 
things were created, the firstborn of God who before the beginning of time was ever-present through his divinity 
in the Father’s heart, was sent by the Lord, the heavenly Father, through the mouth of the prophets to the 
people of Jacob. They proclaimed faithfully that the Son of God would bring salvation into the world so that 
humanity, prepared and armed, might throw down the devil and cleverly turn aside his cunning deceptions. And 
so the Word lighted upon Israel when God’s firstborn lighted upon the green vigour of the maiden that no man 
had known. She preserved her blossom immaculate, in order that the One born of the Maiden should lead back 
to the true path all people, who in the darkness of deception had lost the light of truth, and grant them lasting 
salvation. 


The words of the prophet Isaiah [I, 5, 3] 

‘Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?’^ Who are these who have withdrawn in 
their hearts from earthly and fleshly desires in order to soar in full devotion towards heavenly things? They 
strengthen their bodily senses in dovelike simplicity, without bitter gall. In the ardent zeal of virtue they seek 
refuge in the solid rock that is the Firstborn of God. For they are the ones who for love of heaven trample under 
their feet the kingdoms of the earth and seek the things of heaven. Thus the Synagogue admired the Church, 
because she realized that she herself is not protected by such virtues as she sees in the Church. The Church is 
ringed with guardian angels lest the devil tear her down and throw her to the ground, but God has left the 
Synagogue lying with her failings. 

The parable of the balsam, the onyx and the carbuncle [II, 3, 13] 

Balsam drips from a tree. Strong medicines pass from the onyx vessel in which they are kept. The bright 

radiance of the carbuncle passes out of that gemstone without hindrance.4 In the same way, the Son of God was 
born of a maiden without the hindrance of corruption. And in the same way also, Christ’s bride the Church gives 
birth to her children without the hindrance of error, and yet remains a maiden, intact in her faith. 


[The unarmed youth on the road] (II, 3, 16-17) 


There are two signs of the law handed down and known to men: circumcision in the time of the fathers of the 

Old Testament and baptism^ in the time of the teachers of the New Testament. With these two, humanity is tied 
to the yoke like the ox yoked to the plough. Although the ox is driven forward with the goad, it would pull 

crooked furrows if it were not tied to the yoke. Similarly men and women will not walk my ways (l unless they 
are tied to the yoke of the signs of the law. 

The same is true of the youth who was to travel on the road. 7 If his father told him ‘walk straight ahead!’ but 
did not give him a sword or any other weapon to defend himself with, what would happen? If he was unarmed 
he would flee. He would neither dare nor be able to defend himself against any danger that befell him and 
threatened to divert him from his path. He would conceal himself if he did not have any defensive weapons to 
protect him. In the same way, my people would be unarmed if they were not baptized and thus able to inspire 
fear in their enemies, who see them signed with the anointing of baptism. So furnished, they bravely withstand 
those who wish to destroy them, whether it is a crowd of people or the devil’s army. 

[The rich landlord and the steward] [II, 3, 36] 

[The voice from heaven:] A rich landlord has a steward who allots his goods fairly to those who are eligible and 
exercises his office loyally. If this steward is found guilty of some other misdeed, his lord will nevertheless not 
dismiss him ungraciously from his service. He will however say to him, ‘you are wicked for what you have done.’ 
He will be angry with him in his heart, but he will still graciously accept the administration of his justice. In the 
same way I, who have many stewards, will not hesitate to accept the office of the sacrament said by a 
legitimately consecrated priest, even if he is guilty of other misdeeds. Though I consider him an opponent for 
his unjust deeds, I will not refuse to accept from him what is my due. 

[Sun, moon and stars] [from II, 5] 

[The voice from heaven:] These are great mysteries. Consider the sun, moon and stars. I created the sun to light 
the day and the moon and stars to light the night. The sun signifies my Son, who came forth from my heart and 
shone in the world when, at the end of the ages, he was born of a maiden just as the sun breaks forth, rising at 
the end of the night, and lighting up the world. 

The moon signifies the Church, who is espoused to my Son in a heavenly marriage. And just as the moon, 
according to its disposition, is continuously waxing and waning, not shining by its own power but kindled 
instead by the light of the sun, so the Church also goes through stages. She waxes when her children gain 
increase of virtues, and wanes through deviant behaviour or destructive hostilities against her. It happens 
frequently that she is attacked in her mysteries by thieving wolves, that is evil people, whether bad Christians, 
Jews or Pagans. But she is not kindled with the power to resist from within herself but from me. My Son shines 
on her so that she will persevere with the good. 

The stars vary considerably in their power to shine. They signify the members of the various orders in the 
hierarchy of the Church. 


[The adulterous servant] [II, 5,11] 

[The voice from heaven:] If a great secular lord had a bride very dear to him and if a servant dishonoured her in 
adultery, what would the lord do? You can be sure that in his raging anger he would send out his army to 
destroy the servant, because his action had struck him to the very core. But if the servant came in fear and 
pleaded for mercy before the whole army, and fell down in tears at the feet of his lord, then the lord in his 
goodness, and because of the plea, would preserve his life and return him to the community of his fellow 
servants. But he will not reward him as he does his trusted friends and companions, although he grants him the 
grace he deserves among his fellow servants of the same rank. 

The same goes for the man who seduces and hurts a bride of the eternal King. In righteous anger the King 
proclaims his judgement and delivers him to destruction, wishing, because of this deed, to remove the deceiver 


out of his sight. But if the miscreant, anticipating the day of his fall from favour, humbly pleads with God’s elect 
to intercede for his acquittal, and if he looks in tears to the humanity of his Redeemer in order that through the 
Lord’s mercy he may be acquitted of his sin, then the King will pay heed to the blood that was shed for the 
salvation of humanity. He will consider the love of the citizens of heaven, separating the servant from his guilt 
and from the power of the devil, lest he perish, and numbering him among the chosen souls of the blessed. But 
the King will not reward him at the royal wedding dance or allow him among the ranks of the other friends of 
God and the holy virgins consecrated in heavenly marriage with my Son. He will not crown him with a virgin’s 
crown, since he has lost that modesty, though he will grant him, with the other elect, the incomparable reward 
of the joys of the heavenly city. 


[The good Samaritan] [II, 5,14] 

‘And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said to him, Take 
care of him; and whatever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.’^ What does this mean? 

On the first day of salvation, when God’s Son wonderfully became man and lived on the earth in the body, he 
performed many remarkable deeds in his human life up to the time of the resurrection. And so he brought the 
wounded man to be healed with the remedies of truth. But on the morrow, that is, after his resurrection, when 
all the mysteries of truth had been deposited in the Church, he offered the two covenants, the Old and the New, 
as a clear sign and allusion to the life eternal and the nourishment of the faithful. 

And through his grace, he gave these writings to the shepherds of the Church, who guard his flock, and spoke 
these words of gentle admonishment to them, ‘Take care of the Christian people whom I have redeemed with 
my blood and entrusted to you; and take care lest they lack what pertains to life and wander from the path. I, 
your guide and Saviour, am leaving the world to ascend to my Father. I give these to your keeping, and if in good 
will you add to them by doing more than is commanded of you, I will reward you for your work and good will 
with an increase of fruit. I will come again to judge the transient world and transform it so that it will no longer 

be weakened by the course of time. And I will say to you, “Well done you good and faithful servant. ”9 Whoever 
adds more to his vows than the law requires will receive a double reward; for I will treat his name with honour 
because he has loved me so much.’ 

[The parable of the house builders] [II, 5, 29] 

I compare [lukewarm clerics] to the foolish workmen who erect a large tall building but do not imitate the skills 
of other craftsmen who know very well how to use their tools and are experienced in the many difficulties of 
building work. They know very well what is needed for the construction work and use all their tools 
appropriately. These others, however, place all their vain and foolish trust in themselves because they want to 
excel the others in their skill. They do not build their houses strong enough to withstand the storms; so the 

winds tear them down, because they are built not on rock but on sand. 10 

This is how people behave who trust in themselves in their presumption and want to appear cleverer than the 
old fathers; they do not behave according to the covenant but indiscriminately make new laws as they see fit. 
They are often driven to sin, therefore, by the temptations of the devil, because they are grounded not in Christ 
but in the inconstancy of their own behaviour. 

[Archangels, angels and human beings] [II, 5, 36] 

Preserve love and peace among you, as the souls of the just have love and peace with the angels and the angels 
with the archangels. For the souls of the just do not envy the angels their office, and the angels do not envy the 
glory of the archangels. What does this mean? Archangels convey weighty messages in times of need, while 
angels proclaim the less important, frequently recurring matters, and the faithful people obey in humility. 

Each therefore performs its office faithfully. How should this be understood? 

The monastic orders are a living fragrance sworn to follow the path of special renewal. Like the archangels 
they must give irreplaceable support to the Church in times of need. The perfumers - the priestly orders - 
should perform their frequent duties like the angels, in zealous determination. And the people, who wish to 


attain to the blessed state, should accept their words in good faith. How should we understand this? 

[The monastic orders, priesthood and laity] [II, 5, 37] 

The monastic orders sworn to follow the path of special renewal are the corn that provides the people with 
simple and wholesome food. In this way my people are strengthened and hardened against enjoying the taste of 
worldly things. The perfumers - the priests - are the fruit, sweet-tasting to those who eat of it; thus the priests 
in performing their useful office are attractive to people. The ordinary laity may be regarded as the flesh, 
amongst which there is also clean poultry, for by their fleshly existence in the world they bring forth children, 
among whom there are also followers of chastity such as widows and ascetics, who soar to their heavenly 
desires through their demand for good virtues. 

[On oblates] 11 [II, 5, 46] 

[The voice of the Lord:] I had a green flourishing field. Did I give it you, O human being, so that you could 
produce fruit according to your own wishes? When you have sown the seed, can you yourself transform it into 
fruit? Not at all. You do not send the dew, nor do you cause the rain to fall; you do not provide the moisture of 
fresh greenness nor do you bring forth the warmth of the sunlight. All this is needed to produce fruit. 

In the same way, you can sow a word in a person’s ear, but as for his heart, which is my field, you can send it 
neither the dew of contrition nor the rain of fresh tears; you can pour out neither the moisture of devotion nor 
the warmth of the Holy Spirit. And all these are needed to bring forth the fruit of holiness. 

And how could you move the child consecrated in baptism and without his consent deliver him up by the 
worst of deceptions, forcing him to bear my yoke? And so he could be neither green nor dry, since he had not 
died to the world and did not live for the world either. Why did you push him so far that he could do neither one 
nor the other? 

The marvellous workings of God, which will strengthen him to persevere in the spiritual vocation, should not 
be studied too deeply. But I do not want the parents to sin in the giving of their child if they dedicate him to me 
without his consent. 

If a father or mother wishes to dedicate a son to my service, then well before the presentation they should 
say, ‘I promise God that I will carefully watch and protect my son until the age of understanding. Then I will 
implore, ask and admonish him to stay loyal to God’s service. If he agrees, I will deliver him speedily into 
service to God; but if he refuses his consent then I will not be held responsible in the eyes of the Lord.’ 

If his parents have guided the boy in this way up to the age of understanding, and if he nevertheless turns 
away and will not agree, then it will suffice that they have shown their willingness as well as they could. But 
without his consent they should not deliver him and compel him to a servitude which they themselves are not 
willing to undergo or bring to completion. 


17. Letter to Elisabeth of Schonau 


Elisabeth of Schonau was a fellow visionary whose prophetic writings were sometimes associated with those of 
Hildegard. One important manuscript, for instance, which preserves the oldest version of Hildegard’s songs, 

was written at Rupertsberg and sent by Hildegard to the friendly Cistercian monastery ofVillers in Brabant. 1 
Its main contents are: (l) Hildegard’s Book of Life’s Merits, (2) Elisabeth of Schonau s Book of the Ways of 
God, (3) Hildegard’s Symphonia, and (4) a short anonymous dialogue. Though influenced by Hildegard, 
Elisabeth differed in many ways from her: she was unable to write Latin, and so used the services of her 
brother, the priest Eckbert, to turn her dictated German into written Latin; her visions were experienced while 
she was in a trance; they show less evidence of the wide reading that characterizes Hildegard’s work. In 
addition Elisabeth was far more ascetic than her mentor Hildegard (in this she might be compared to 
Hildegard’s erstwhile guardian Jutta ofSpanheim), and Hildegard warned her against the dangers of 
exaggerated austerity towards the body. In this particular letter, the warning to take care of the fragile vessel’ 
is an implied rather than openly critical condemnation of excessive abstinence, within a letter which places its 
emphasis on the positive aspects of the creation of the world and the history of salvation. 


Hildegardto Elisabeth of Schonau, 1152-6 (Letter 201R) 

I, a mere female and a fragile vessel, speak these things not from me but from the serene light. A human being 

is a vessel that God has built for himself and filled with his inspiration so that his works are perfected in it. 2 For 
God’s activity is not like human activity, but in giving his command, all things are brought to perfection. 

Grasses, woods and trees appeared; the sun also came forth, as did the moon and the stars in their various 
functions; the waters brought forth fishes and birds; herds and animals also rose up, which serve human beings 
as God so placed them. 

But humanity alone did not acknowledge God. For when God gave great knowledge to the human being, the 
human being elevated himself in his soul and turned away from God. God so regarded the human being that he 
would perfect all his works in him. But the old deceiver tricked human beings and infected them with the crime 
of disobedience, by the delight of an unseasonable wind, so that they sought for more than they should have. 

Ach! Weh!3 Then all the elements were folded in the alternation of light and darkness, as also was humanity 
through the transgression of God’s commands. But God watered certain human beings so that humanity would 

not become a complete mockery .4 So Abel was good, though Cain was a murderer. And many saw God’s 
mysteries in the light, though others committed many sins, until that time came when the Word of God shone 

out, as is said: ‘Thou art fairer than the children of men’.5 Then the sun of justice ^ came forth and shone on 
human beings in their good works, both in faith and action, as the dawn first came forth and as the other hours 
of the day follow on until it is night. Therefore, daughter Elisabeth, the world is changing. It has grown tired in 

all the vigour of the virtues and powers, as at dawn, prime, terce and especially the sixth hour of the day7 But at 
this time, it is necessary that God should water certain human beings so that his instruments do not become 
idle. 

Listen, O anxious daughter, because these people whom God has so filled with his inspiration sometimes 
become tired through the arrogant promptings of the ancient serpent. For when the same serpent sees an 
elegant gemstone, he soon hisses and says: ‘What is this?’ And he tires it out with the many afflictions of a mind 

longing to soar over the clouds as though they were gods,^ as he once did. 

Now listen again. Those who want to perfect the works of God should always attend to the fact that they are 
fragile vessels, for they are human beings, and they should look at what they are and what they will be. But they 
should leave heavenly things to the one who is of heaven, for they are exiles and ignorant of heavenly things, 

singing the secrets of God9 like a trumpet which only gives out a sound but does not work by itself, since it 
needs someone else to blow into it so that it will make a sound. But let the mild, the gentle, the poor and the 

needy put on the breastplate of faith, 10 as also the Lamb was their trumpet and they are now the sound; and in 
their characters they are like simple children. For God always scourges those who sing forth in his trumpet, 
employing his foresight in order that the fragile vessel will not perish, as it so pleases him. 

Daughter, may God make you a mirror to life. But as for me, I remain in the meagreness of my own mind. I 
am very tired, anxious and fearful, at times sounding forth as the small sound of the trumpet from the Living 
Light. May God help me that I remain in his service. 


i8. Gertrud of Stahl eck 


On 26 May 1146, Eberhard, Provost of St Jakob in Bamberg, had been elected Bishop and at the end of that 
year consecrated by Pope Eugenius HE The new bishop had good relations with the Emperor Barbarossa and 
took part in his Italian expeditions. Gertrud ofStahleck was sister of King Conrad III and so Barbarossa s 
aunt. She and her husband Hermann ofStahleck, the Count Palatine, gave rich gifts to the Rupertsberg 
convent, and after the letters death in 1156 Gertrud became a nun and then abbess in the Cistercian convent of 
Wechterswinkel in the diocese of Wurzburg. The situation was for various reasons unsuitable, and eventually, 
after Hildegard wrote to intervene on her behalf Eberhard granted Gertrud the hospital of Bamberg cathedral 
seminary to use as a basis for a new foundation. Gertrud and the other nuns moved there in 1157 and 
established the site as the convent of St Theodore and St Mary in Bamberg. The happy outcome of the two 
letters here thus contrasts strikingly with Hildegard’s unsuccessful attempts to retrieve Richard is ofStadefive 
years before. 



Hildegard to Eberhard, Bishop of Bamberg, 1157 [Letter 30] 

A certain man rose at the dawning of the day and planted a vineyard. Afterwards, because of many disputes, he 
turned his attention further afield, and it was here that his hard work was completed. Now, father, look to your 
wandering daughter Gertrud, who was called from her own land like Abraham, who departed from his own 

country. She has given away all these things and bought a pearl . 1 But now her mind is stifled by great worries, 
like a grape in a wine-press. Help her therefore, as much as you can - for the love of Him who was before 
creation and who fulfilled all things with his compassion - so that the vineyard within this daughter may never 
be destroyed! 


Hildegard to the Nun Gertrud, 2 after 1161 [Letter 62R] 

Daughter of God, in the pure knowledge of faith, hear these words spoken to you: ‘the voice of the turtledove is 

heard in our land’ .3 This is the Son of God, who - against the laws of the flesh - was born from the wholeness 
of the earth, the flesh of the Virgin Mary. And the flowers of all the virtues came forth and the beauties of all the 
fragrances. For the garden of these virtues arose in the prodigal son, who, when he came to himself, ran to 
confess his sins to his father, that is, to the omnipotent Father. And his Father received him with the kiss of his 
Son’s humanity. 

When with our own will we give up the world for the love of God, then the voice of the turtledove is heard, for 
above all other birds the turtledove remains alone when she loses her mate. Dearest daughter, you also did this 
when you gave up the pomp of this world. Flow beautiful your shoes were, daughter of the king, when for the 
love of God you entered upon the strait and narrow path of the spiritual life! Therefore rejoice, daughter of Zion, 

for the Holy Spirit dwells in the middle of your heart.4 Consider that your comforter created you ‘as a lily among 
thorns’, 5 although when you chose the spiritual life you still had the pomp and riches of this age, which the Son 

of God called thorns.* You also shone red like a rose of Jericho in the passion of your conversion to the spiritual 
life. 

But now I have joy in you, because what I have heard and desired for you is now complete; you should rejoice 
with me too. And I hope with a true hope that you will become a wall decorated with precious stones and 

pearls, ^ and that you will earn the praises of the heavenly host. Rejoice and be glad in God, for you will live 
forever. 


19. Letter to the Abbess of Bamberg 


This letter, to an unknown abbess L. at the Abbey of St Theodore and St Mary at Bamberg, shows another side 
to Hildegard’s views on education, discipline and the training of young oblates. It should be seen against the 
background of the Benedictine Rule, which regulated the communal life of the monastery, and on which 
Hildegard wrote a commentary. Chapter 5 of the Rule, for instance, states that ‘the first degree of humility is 

obedience without delay. This is the virtue of those who hold nothing dearer to them than Christ.’ 1 


Hildegard to the Abbess of Bamberg, 2 after 1157 [Letter 61R] 

Mother, imagine a field in the fullness of fertility. Now if the man who has the field does not dig it and make it 
fruitful, then he is neglectful, because he does not work for his reward from the head of the household. Think 
who made the ox and the ass. God created them to serve human beings. So why does a man not work for his 
own benefit when we consider that he is wholly the handiwork of God and that God did not make him to be vain 
and useless? 

For God made humanity like the firmament which bears the sun, moon and stars to shine their light on the 
whole of creation and to show the times and the seasons. But if they were all obscured by black clouds then 
creation would be afraid that its end was coming. 

Daughter of God, know that you yourself are this field because you embrace the people with your 
benevolence so that they can receive your words and deeds. So don’t avoid working with them and don’t 
abandon them for lack of leisure time, since useless weeds will often grow wherever there is leisure. You should 
put before you a vision of the firmament so that you do not hide the light of your reason behind black clouds of 
evil, as if you were barely alive. 

Therefore you should restrain and discipline your daughters in all matters. Just as a young lad is scared of 
being beaten with a rod, so the one in authority must be feared by everyone. Do not be afraid of punishing them 
in this way, for in so doing you will increase your reward in the life everlasting, so that the breath of the Spirit 
may flow within you. 


IN PRAISE OF CREATION 


20. The Cosmic Egg (from Sciiuas I, 3) 


A famous image in Hildegard’s work is that of the ‘cosmic egg’, a survey of the cosmos which forms the third 
vision of the first book o/Scivias. This vision is descriptive, but also highly allegorical, and it is worth noting 
that although each detail of the description represents a physical object in Hildegard’s universe, she also 
attaches a further significance to it in the life of faith and the events of history. In so doing she implies that 
human life and the universe are closely and inextricably connected, as microcosm and macrocosm. This ties in 
with her exalted view of the human being in Scivias 1 , 3, 17 (translated below), a characteristic attitude of the 
twelfth-century Renaissance. 


The cosmic egg 

After these things I saw a huge form, rounded and shadowy, and shaped like an egg ; 1 it was pointed at the top, 
wide in the middle and narrower at the bottom. Its outer layer consisted of an atmosphere of bright fire with a 
kind of dark membrane beneath it. And in that outer atmosphere there was a ball of red fire so large that all the 
huge form was lit up by it. Directly above the fireball was a vertical row of three lights which held it with their 
fire and energy and prevented it from falling. 

At times the fireball rose upwards and was met by more fire, which caused it to shoot out great long flames. 
At times, however, the fireball moved downwards and encountered a region of great cold that caused it quickly 
to retract its flames. 

From the outer atmosphere of fire, a wind blew storms. And from the dark membrane beneath, another wind 
raged with further storms which moved out in all directions on the globe. The dark membrane contained also a 
dark fire of such horror that I was unable to perceive it properly. The horror buffeted the dark membrane with a 

massive impact of sounds and storms and sharp stones great and small . 2 Whenever the noise arose it set in 
motion the layer of bright fire, winds and air, thus causing bolts of lightning to presage the sounds of thunder; 
for the fiery energy senses the first agitations of the thunder within it. 

Below the dark layer, however, was the purest of ether with no membrane beneath it. Here also I saw a 
fireball, of great magnitude, filled with white-shining energy; it had two lights placed above it which held it and 
prevented it from passing beyond the circuit of its course. Situated everywhere throughout the ether were many 
bright spheres, into which the white fireball discharged its energy at regular intervals. It then rose up again to 
the red fireball where it recharged its fires and sent them forth again into the bright spheres. The ether also 
contained a wind, which poured out its storms and extended them all over the cosmos. 

Beneath the ether I could see a layer of watery air, which had a white membrane beneath it. It spread out 
everywhere, giving off water to the whole of the world. At times it accumulated quickly and sent out a sudden 
fall of rain with a great crash. But when it spread gently it sent forth soft rain with only gentle agitation. But 
from it there came a wind and storms which spread all over the globe. 

And in the middle of these elements there was a sandy ball of great size which was so surrounded by these 
elements that it could not move in any direction. However, when the winds collided with the elements, the force 
of their impact set the whole world in motion a little. 

And I saw between the north and the east the likeness of a great mountain, which showed great areas of 

darkness towards the north and a great light towards the east. 3 The darkness could not affect the light nor the 
light the darkness. 

And again I heard a voice speaking to me from heaven. 

1. Invisible and eternal things are made known through visible and temporal things 
God, who created all things in his will, made them so that his name would be known and honoured. Through his 


creation he not only makes known visible and temporal things but also invisible and eternal things.4 Such 
matters are shown in this vision which you see. 

2. The significance of the cosmos made in the likeness of an egg 

‘I saw a huge form, rounded and shadowy, and shaped like an egg; it was pointed at the top, wide in the middle 
and narrower at the bottom.’ The large form which you see represents, on the level of faith, the omnipotent God, 
incomprehensible in his majesty, inconceivable in his mysteries, the hope of all the faithful. It was pointed at 
the top because at first human activity was naive and simple; later in the Old and New Testaments it became 
more wide-ranging; finally towards the end of the world it is to endure the narrow constriction of many 
troubles. 


4. The position of the sun and the three stars and their significance 

‘And in that outer atmosphere there was a ball of red fire so large that all the huge form was lit up by it.’ With 
the splendour of his brightness he shows that in God the Father is his ineffable firstborn son, the Sun of Justice, 
shining with burning love in such glory that all of creation was lit up by the brightness of his light. 

‘Directly above the fireball was a vertical row of three lights which held it with their fire and energy and 
prevented it from falling.’ The function of the three lights is to show that when God’s Son descended from 
heaven to earth leaving the angels above him, he made known the things of the heavens to human beings 
existing in soul and body. By following his light they glorify him, casting all harmful error from them. They 
praise him as the true Son of God, who became incarnate of the true Maiden when the angel proclaimed him to 
them and when the human being - alive in soul and body - received him with faith and joy. 

16. The sandy ball of the earth and its significance 

‘And in the middle of these elements there was a sandy ball of great size which was so surrounded by these 
elements that it could not move in any direction.’ The ball represents humanity endowed with the gift of 
profound contemplation, made in a wonderful manner from the clay of the earth, and living in the strength of 
the creatures of God. Human beings are so surrounded by the power of God’s created things that they cannot be 
separated from them. The elements of the world are thus created for human beings and render them their 

service. 5 In the midst of the elements is the human being presiding over them by divine ordinance. As David 
says, inspired by God: 


17. The words of David 

‘Thou hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy 

hands. This means that you, O God, have wonderfully created all things. You have crowned the human being 
with the splendid golden crown of the understanding and clothed him with the honourable robe of visible 
beauty. You have made him the ruler over your exalted and perfect works, which you have distributed justly and 
well throughout your creation. Over all other creatures you have granted the human being high worth and 
admirable dignity. 


18. The meaning of the earthquake 

You see in the vision that opposing winds come together, and the force of their impact sets the whole globe in 
motion a little. For when at any given time the creatures of God become involved with the knowledge of their 
Creator, so that with the sounding of the words one wonder follows another, then human beings, struck by the 
grandeur of this miracle, tremble in body and soul, pondering, in their wonder at this miracle, their own 
weakness and frailty. 


21. The Cosmos (from Causes and Cures I) 


Causes and Cures, otherwise known as The Book of Compound Medicine, deals with the creation of the cosmos, 
the human body, health and the cure of ailments. The opening chapter is particularly interesting for its 
discussion, in a ‘non-prophetic’ style, of matters usually treated by Hildegard in the visions of her more widely 
read trilogy. Though still rooted in the theology of its time, Causes and Cures is also more openly influenced by 
the philosophical and scientific ideas of the twelfth century. Its factual style mirrors the subject-matter, the 
sentence structure is simpler and clearer, and there is less frequent resort to the vivid, but also mysterious, 
allegorical imagery which figures in the passages on the cosmic egg from Scivias ( 20 ). 

The creation of the world 

God was, before the creation of the world, without beginning, because he is. He was and is always light and 

glory, and he was always life. 1 So when God wished to create the world, he made it from nothing, because all the 
material of the world was in his will. 


Matter 

When God’s will revealed itself, in order to create the whole of reality, just as he wished, the material of the 
world came out of his will still unformed 2 and like a dark mass. 

The creation of the angels 

And the Father’s word sounded forth: ‘Let there be light’, 3 and immediately everything was light and the world 
was full of angels shining with light. For the words ‘Let there be light’ did not signify individual lights, but rather 
the specially formed light which is the angels. But when he said: ‘Let there be lights’, this signifies the light of 

the air which we can see.4 


The fall of Lucifer^ 

Lucifer however saw in the North an empty region not yet filled with creative activity and he intended to set up 
his seat there, and make more and greater works than God himself, since he did not know of God’s intention to 
create other creatures. He had not seen the face of the Father; he did not know of his power, nor had he tasted 
his goodness; therefore, before he had experienced any of these things, he tried to rebel against God. But God 
had not yet made known these things; he kept them hidden, just as a strong and powerful man will do when he 
conceals his strength from the others who do not yet know him - until he sees what they think of him and what 
actions they intend to begin and carry out. 

But because Lucifer in his perverse will wished to elevate himself to nothingness, all that he wished to create 
was indeed nothing, and he fell into it and could not stand since he had no ground beneath him. Indeed he had 
no height above him and no depth below him to prevent him from falling. But now, as he stretched forth to 
grasp at nothing, the inception of this action of stretching forth produced evil, and the evil caught fire within 

itself, although without any light or brightness, and inflamed by his envy of God,° and it rotated like a wheel 
turned only by itself, and showed burning darkness within itself. 

In this way, good and evil fell apart: good did not touch evil, nor evil good. But God himself remained whole 
and perfect like a wheel; he remained the Father in goodness, because his fatherhood is full of his goodness. 
Therefore his fatherhood is very just and fully good, and at once both strong and stable; and seen in this 
measure, it is conceived as a wheel. Now this wheel is in some place, and there is something inside the wheel. If 
this wheel had just an outer rim, it would be empty. And if an outsider happened to come and wanted to work 
there, then he would not be able to, for two craftsmen cannot work at the same time on one single wheel. 


Human creature, take a careful look at humankind! Each human being contains heaven and earth and all of 
creation and yet remains one whole figure, and within every human being all things lie concealed . 7 

On the fatherhood 

The fatherhood is like this. The circle of the wheel is the fatherhood; the fullness of the wheel is the divinity. All 
things originate there, and without it there would be no Creator. Lucifer on the other hand lacks this wholeness: 
he is scattered and divided, because he wished to be what he could not be. 

For when God created the world, he had already determined by his ancient counsel that he would become a 
man . 6 


The creation of the soul 

And when he created the light, which was winged and could fly everywhere, he determined in the same ancient 
counsel that he would give a corporeal mass to the spiritual life, which is the breath of life, and give it a shape 
formed from the clay of the earth, which does not have the ability to fly or breathe or raise itself above itself; 
therefore it would be all the more bound down and it would gaze all the more attentively towards God. And so 
the ancient serpent had such hatred for that bond, because this very human creature which had become so 
weighed down by its corporeality was destined nevertheless, by means of its rationality, to raise itself to the 
godhead. 


On the elements and the firmament 

God also created the elements of the cosmos. All the elements are present in human beings and each human 
being is able to function through the elements, which are fire, air, water and earth. These four basic substances 
are interwoven and connected to such an extent that none of them can be separated from the others; and they 
are so closely interconnected that they are known as the firmament. 

The sun and the stars 

Within this structure, the sun is almost supreme, and it sends its fire and splendour over everything. Grouped 
around the sun are various stars of such strength and brightness that they are like mountains in the way they 
reach down through the firmament to the earth, and the closer they are to the earth, the brighter they seem to 
be. Round the sun also there are other stars of lesser strength and brightness; these are like low valleys in 
comparison to the majesty of those other luminaries and they therefore appear smaller. 

Storms 

If there is a greater heat and fervour of fire in the ether, then this heat causes a sudden rise and dangerous 
flooding of the waters, which it sends upon the earth, causing cloudbursts and storms. It is like the pot over a 
hot fire suddenly coming to the boil and frothing over. Frequently these storms occur according to God’s 
judgement because of wickedness, or because of evil deeds perpetrated by men, or as portents of future dangers 
such as war, famine, or sudden death. The reason is that all our actions affect the elements and are in turn 
disturbed and influenced by the elements. But if there is a lesser heat and fervour of fire in the ether, then it 
causes a much smaller rise and flooding of the waters; this is like a pot over a small fire which only produces a 
bare minimum of froth and bubbles. But when the air is temperate with fire and water then it sends forth 
moderate weather, just as a pan placed over a moderate fire gives off a mild heat. But when the sun rises up so 
that its fire burns vigorously in the height of the heavens, then also the air sometimes becomes dry and arid 
from the heat of the sun, and the fire of the sun sometimes affects the fire of the thunderstorm. 


On thunderstorms 


For in the thunder is the fire of judgement where there is both stench and cold.9 And whenever the fire of the 
thunder is affected by the fire of the sun it becomes agitated and sends out mild flashes of lightning. 

Lightning 

Some mild murmurings of thunder follow, and then they cease, like a man who is moved to anger but does not 
vent it fully because he checks and restrains it. Sometimes, however, the fire of the thunder is stirred by the 
great heat of the sun until it becomes so agitated that it sends out large and dangerous bolts of lightning, and 
raises its voice loudly, like a man who is moved to great anger and expresses it in violent behaviour. Again on 
occasions when the upper fire of the thunder is touched by the fire of the sun, the cold which is in the thunder 
unites in one place, just as water accumulates in one place as ice, and the cold transmits hail to the clouds, and 
the clouds gather it up and disperse it and send it out onto the earth. 

Hail 

Hail is like the eye of the thunder. But when the sun becomes lower in winter, it does not transfer its fire to the 
height of the heavens, and it burns more when it is below the earth than it does above the earth, and it does not 
burn any longer in the height of the heavens. 


The waters 

And so the waters which are in the upper reaches of the sky become like dust scattered by the cold, and they 
cause snow to fall. 


Rain 

But when they warm up and become milder again, they cause rain to fall, and when the sun in the meantime 
now manifests neither too much heat nor too much cold then it sometimes sends forth mild rain, just as 
someone will often shed tears of joy when they are happy. 

Winds 

The four cardinal winds support the firmament below and above the level of the sun. They hold together the 
whole cosmos from the lower to the upper part of the firmament and cover it like a cloak. The east wind 
embraces the air and dispenses gentle moisture to the dry regions. The west wind mingles with the floating 
clouds, to sustain the waters and prevent them from bursting forth. The south wind keeps the fire under its 
control and prevents it from burning up everything. The north wind controls the outer areas of darkness, so that 

they do not exceed their measure. These four winds are the wings of the power of God. 10 If they were all set in 
motion at the same time they would confuse the elements and break apart; they would agitate the sea and dry 
up all the waters. 


The judgement of God 

But now they are securely locked by the keys of God’s majesty so that the elements are held in moderation in 
order that they will not cause harm to anyone, except at the end of the world when all things will be purified. 

Afterwards they will bring their song back into harmony. 11 And no created being can exist that consists of only 
one property; rather it must demonstrate at least several such properties. 

On nothingness 

But nothingness has no particular property from which it might derive its existence; it is therefore quite simply 
nothing. For this reason, as soon as the other creatures voluntarily associate themselves with nothingness then 


they lose their own properties and also come to nothing. 


On the firmament and winds 

The firmament has fire, sun, moon, stars and winds; it exists through all these things together and by their 
properties it is strengthened so that it does not fall apart. Just as the soul holds the whole of the human body, so 
also the winds hold together all of the firmament to prevent it from disintegrating. And they are invisible, just as 
the soul is invisible emerging from the mystery of God. And like the house that will not stand without 
cornerstones, so also the firmament, earth, abyss and the whole world with all its components cannot exist 
without these winds, because they bring all these things together and hold them together. The whole world 
would break up and fall apart if these winds did not exist; in the same way the human body would fall apart if it 
did not have its bones. The main east wind holds together all the eastern region; the main west wind holds 
together all the western region; the main south wind holds together all the southern region; and the main north 
wind holds together all the northern region. 


The collateral winds 

Each of these main winds has two weaker winds assisting it like two arms, into which at times it breathes its 
strength. These weaker winds have the same nature as that possessed by the main winds. Each of the inferior 
winds imitates the main wind as though it were its head (although with far less strength) in that the inferior 
winds have the same path as the main wind, just as the two ears have the same path for a sound in the head. 

And when they are agitated by a higher command, they receive their breath and strength from the main winds. 

In such instances they are agitated so much that they produce a great deal of noise and dangerous collisions, in 
the same way as bad humours cause dangerous disturbances in human beings when they cast them into 

illness . 12 

From the beginning of the world, the main winds have never been fully agitated to their full strength, nor will 
they be so moved until the last day. But then they will reveal their strength and send forth the fullness of their 
blasts; because of their force and collisions, the clouds will be broken up and the higher firmaments will be 
folded up and torn apart, just as the human body is broken and its limbs scattered when the soul is released and 
departs from its body. 

The east wind has two wings through which it attracts the globe of the sun to itself. In this way one wing 
contains the course of the sun from the heights to the depths, and the other wing runs towards the sun so that it 
is an obstacle to it to prevent it from moving in another direction from where it was intended to move. And this 
wind brings all kinds of moisture and brings about all kinds of germinations. 

The west wind could be compared to a mouth to convey and dispense all the waters, so that it divides and 
disperses all the waters onto their right paths in order that no water may rise above the other but will run its 
course correctly. In fact this wind has power over the air which bears the waters. It drives out all greenness and 
anything with which it comes into contact. 

The south wind is like a kind of iron rod with three branches at the top and a sharp point at the bottom. Its 
strength is like steel so strong that it can restrain both the firmament and the abyss. For just as steel overcomes 
and supersedes all other metals, and just as the heart strengthens the human being, so the strength of this wind 
contains the firmament and the abyss of this region so that it does not collapse. 

And at the top it has three strengths like three branches, one of which tempers the sun as it rises, another 
suppresses the sun’s heat in the middle of the day, while a third cools the sun’s heat as it sets; in this way it does 
not exceed its normal function in those regions. It is sharply pointed at the bottom because its strength is also 
fixed in the abyss so that the moisture and the cold do not rise up beyond all moderation. 

The same wind brings all growing things to maturity: it causes the ripening of the leaves in the trees and the 
grass, the crops, the apples and all the other fruits of the earth. 

The north wind is like four pillars which hold together all the firmament and all the abyss. When it removes 
its pillars on the last day then the firmament will fold up on itself and fall into the abyss. These four pillars 
contain the four elements, which are closely connected, confined and as it were supported by the pillars so that 
they do not fall. When on the last day this wind moves the four pillars by its strength, then the firmament will 


be folded like a book. And this wind is cold, and bears the cold with it. Using its cold it constrains all things and 
at the same time holds them together so that they do not fall apart. 

The sun 

And the sun, as was said before, is positioned at the highest point and so to speak in the middle of the 
firmament; and it is fiery and airy. It holds with its fire every support and foundation of the firmament -along 
with the air, the luminaries, the stars and clouds - to prevent them from falling and dispersing. The sun also 
strengthens the ether. 

When the sun stands at the height of the firmament, fire and energy run to it and act as its servants. The sun 
strengthens all the firmament and scatters its brightness over the whole of the earth, causing it to bring forth 
green vigour of fruitfulness. During this period, the days are long because the sun is running its course at the 
height of the firmament, and it is summer. But when the sun drops closer to the earth, the cold of the earth runs 
to it from the water and causes all green things to dry up. And because the sun has dropped closer to the earth, 

the days are short, and it is winter. Also the sun’s heat is greater in winter below the earth than it is above it; 1 ^ 
and if the cold were as great below as above, or if in summer the heat were the same below the earth as above, 

then the earth would break apart from immoderation. *4 When winter is approaching, the tempests rise from the 
water and darken the light of the sun; the days will therefore be darker. But when summer is approaching, the 
storms fall below the earth, so that the days are often beautiful and bright because summer is here. The sun is 
whole and full in its orbit and does not fade; and it sends its light to the moon when it moves towards it just as a 
man sends his seed into a woman. 


The moon 

The moon is made of fire and thin air; it is situated in the air and has its habitat there, and the air is 
strengthened by the moon. After it has waned, the moon passes beneath the sun, from which a sphere is 

extended that attracts the moon closer to it, like a loadstone attracting iron to it. 1 ^ The sun then kindles fire in 
the moon, although the other planets and stars and the air and other heavenly bodies surrounding the moon 
burn towards it and contribute to the process of ignition. After it has been lit, the moon gradually waxes to its 
fullness like fire wood or a burning house, gradually catching fire until all of it is in flames. In the meantime, as 
the moon waxes to fullness, the sun strengthens the higher parts of the firmament, never ceasing from its task. 
The sun precedes and accompanies the day because the higher firmament is bright, while the moon precedes 

and accompanies the night because the earth is dark. 1 ^ After the moon is full so that it becomes like a pregnant 
woman, it sends forth its light and passes it on to the stars; in this way the stars are made brighter. 

Dew 

Then also, from the same heat, the stars heat the air and strengthen it, and the warm air gives off it moisture as 
dew, sends it onto the earth and so makes it fertile. And so the earth is watered and produces fruits. For while 
the moon is emptying itself and so passing its light to the stars, and while it is waxing to fullness when kindled 
by the sun, the stars gradually send out their light and warmth, which they have received from the moon, into 
the air in order to warm it and strengthen it. The air exudes its moisture onto the earth in order to make it 
fertile, so that when the moon is full again, the stars are again empty and ready to receive new light and heat 
from it. And when the moon wanes, the stars are full in order to strengthen the air and the earth. And the stars 
wane so that the moon will again be full. 


The purification by the airs 

But when the stars appear at night, then burning spheres and projectiles are sometimes seen flying in the air. 
The explanation is that the stars are sending their fire and energy into the air in order to strengthen it, and the 
air then makes the earth fruitful with its heat. Therefore also the air is often seen purging itself with the fire and 
heat of the stars so that its impurities fall from it like dregs. 


The threads of the air 


Similarly, when summer and winter separate so that either summer recedes and winter arrives or winter recedes 
and summer arrives, then a certain mixed substance appears, flying in the air, like a whiteness of threads, where 
the air is purifying itself. This descends to the earth owing to the collision of summer and winter, that is, when 
the two seasons come into conflict with each other. 


Eclipses 

Sometimes an eclipse of the moon is seen when the elements and the storms collide as though they had a 
conflict among them. On these occasions the moon is darkened by the storms for a period rather than waning or 
being extinguished. But the force of the moon is such that it can overcome these storms and send out its 
splendour again, because the force of the moon is greater than the force of these storms. 

The five planets 

There are also five planets, which have their light from the fire and from the ether; they are the support and 
strength of the firmament. They have their orbits in the heights and depths of the firmament where the sun’s 
rays do not reach and where its splendour is hardly shown. Wherever they are situated and wherever they move 
to they also serve the sun in its orbit, restraining the sun’s speed and causing its fire to diminish in such a way 
that because of the planets, the sun does not send out such burning heat as it would do if they did not restrain it. 
And just as the five senses of the human body hold it together and are its ornaments, so also the five planets 
contain the sun and are its beauty. 


The retarding of the firmament 

The firmament revolves at great speed, and the sun - with the other planets - moves a little more slowly in the 
opposite direction and thus restrains its speed, because, if the sun did not restrain it and slow it down, or if the 
sun - with the other planets - moved in the opposite direction to the firmament at the same speed as it actually 
revolves, then all things would be thrown into disorder and the whole of the firmament would collapse. If the 
firmament were motionless and did not turn, then the sun would have to stay above the earth for almost the 
whole of the summer without its becoming night and stay below the earth for almost the whole of the winter 
without its becoming day. But the firmament turns in such a manner that while it moves in opposition to the 
sun and the sun in opposition to it, it is rapidly thickened and strengthened by the heat of the sun, for the sun 
moves through the whole of the firmament and pervades and penetrates it with its fire. Before the fall of Adam, 
the firmament was motionless and did not turn, but after his fall it began to move and revolve. However, after 
the last day it will stay motionless just as it was at the first creation before Adam. Now, however, it revolves for a 
reason: so that it is confirmed and strengthened by the sun, moon, and stars, for if it stood still it would quickly 
soften, turn liquid, and flow away in all directions. Also, because it revolves gradually it is able to purify the 
elements, and this purification is what we see as black clouds bearing water; just as water placed in a pot over a 
fire and brought to the boil throws up its froth and bubbles and so has a cleaning effect. 

The music of the firmament 

In its revolving the firmament emits marvellous sounds, which we nevertheless cannot hear because of its great 
height and expanse; likewise a millwheel or cartwheel gives off sounds when it turns. But the firmament is at 
such a height and expanse above the earth so that it does not destroy the people and animals upon the earth; 
therefore it is far enough away, for if it were any nearer the humans and animals would perish by the fire and 
winds and by the water and the clouds. As body and soul are one and support each other, in the same way the 
planets with the firmament confirm each other and strengthen each other. And like the soul that enlivens and 
strengthens the body, the sun - with the moon and the other stars - warms and strengthens the firmament 
with its fire. Thus the firmament is like a human head; the sun, moon and stars are the eyes; the air is our sense 
of hearing, the winds our sense of smell, the dew our taste; the sides of the cosmos are like our arms and our 
sense of touch. And the other creatures that are in the world are like our stomach, but the earth is our heart. As 



the heart holds the body together from top to bottom so the earth is a secure land for the waters on its surface 
and a firm resistance to the waters beneath the earth to prevent them from wrongly breaking out. 



22. Gemstones (from Physica IV) 


The Book of Gemstones is part IV o/Physica, or The Book of Simple Medicine, a compendium of knowledge on 
herbs, trees, animals, gemstones, metals and rivers, in each case showing the uses of these natural objects for 
human health and well-being. In this respect it follows a tradition that goes back to Greek and Roman writers 
such as Dioscorides and Pliny. In the extracts here we are given information on the occurrence of particular 
gems and how they can be used as medicine and food, sometimes accompanied by a prayer or charm in order 
to treat specific complaints and ailments. Such illnesses are usually understood in terms of an imbalance of one 
of the four elements or ‘humours’ within the human body. The stones can be used to treat such imbalances 
because of specif ic proportions of the elements of fire and water that occur in the stones when they are formed. 
In some cases, Hildegard did not know, or chose to avoid, the Latin names of the complaints to be treated, and 
since her visionary writings came to her in Latin, these are some of the few times in her work when she resorts 
to her vernacular German in order to clarify her meaning. 

Preface 

All gemstones contain energy and moisture. They terrify the devil, who hates and despises them because he 
remembered that their beauty appeared in him before he fell from the glory which God had given him, and also 
because some precious stones are created from the fire and energy in which he himself has his punishments. It 
was in fact by fire that the devil was defeated, through God’s will, and he fell into fire, just as he is also defeated 
by the fire of the Holy Spirit whenever people are rescued from the devil’s jaws through the inspiring breath of 
the Holy Spirit. 

Precious stones and jewels have their origin in the East, and in those areas where the heat of the sun is 
particularly strong. The mountains that occur in such areas have a great heat, like fire, which comes from the 
heat of the sun; similarly the rivers that flow in these regions are always boiling hot, due to the same great heat 
of the sun. Accordingly, when at times the rivers flood and break their banks, increasing in volume and rising up 
to the mountains that are burning with the great heat of the sun, and when these come into contact with the 
rivers, then, in those places where the water makes contact with the fire, they throw up a kind of foam, in other 
words they ‘singelent’, that is, send out spray, just as a burning piece of iron or stone does when water is poured 
on it. And so the foam hangs in those places like ‘glitten’ or glue, and within three or four days hardens into 
stone. When the flood of waters has ceased and the waters have resumed their normal courses, then the drops 
of foam, which remain hanging at various locations in the mountains, are dried by the heat of the sun according 
to the various hours of the day and their corresponding temperatures. The stones therefore assume their 
colours and powers according to the temperature of the hour of the day at which they are formed, and once they 
have dried and hardened into precious stones, they drop like scales from their locations and fall into the sand. 
And when the rivers rise again in flood, they carry away the gemstones and deposit them in different regions, 
where eventually they are found by human beings. Owing to the many gemstones which they bring forth in this 
way, these mountains shine as bright as day. 

In this way, then, precious stones are made out of fire and water; they therefore contain energy and moisture 
within them and they have many powerful qualities and effects, so that many actions can be carried out with 
them. These actions are nevertheless good and honest and useful to human beings, and not works of seduction, 
fornication, adultery, hostility, murder and the like, which are vices in opposition to human beings. For it is the 
nature of precious stones to seek the honest and useful and reject the evil and false in human beings, in the 
same way that the virtues throw off the vices, and in the same way that it is impossible for the vices to act in 
conjunction with the virtues. 

There are other kinds of gemstones that do not originate in the mountains in the manner just described, but 
are produced from various other useless substances. Through these stones both good and evil can be done, 
according to their natures, and as God allows it. God in fact gave the first angel beauty as of precious stones 
which Lucifer saw shining brightly in the divine mirror, and from these he received his knowledge, and in them 
he realized that God wished to carry out many marvels. Then his mind was raised in pride, because the beauty of 
the stones, which was in him, was shining out in God. He thought he could be the equal of God and more, and 



so his brightness was extinguished. But just as God raised Adam to a better part, so God allowed neither the 
beauty nor the virtue of the stones to perish, for he wished them to remain in the earth in honour and blessing, 
and for medicinal use. 


l. Smaragdus 

Smaragdus grows in the early morning at the rising of the sun, when the sun is powerfully placed in its circuit 
for the perfection of its journey, and when the grasses and greenness of the earth flourish at their best, for the 
air at that time is still cold but the sun already warm; and at that time the herbs absorb the greenness as 
powerfully as a lamb sucking its milk so that the heat of the day is barely enough to ripen and nourish the 
greenness of the day and make the plants fertile enough for the producing of fruit. 

Smaragdus is therefore effective against all human weaknesses and infirmities, because it is brought forth by 
the sun and because all its material springs from the greenness of the air. So for a pain in the heart, stomach, or 
side, carry smaragdus about you to warm the flesh of your body, and it will feel better. But if the illness strikes a 
person so suddenly that they can barely withstand its attack, then they should immediately put the smaragdus 
in their mouth, so that it is moistened with saliva, and so that the saliva is warmed by the gemstone, and they 
should breathe in and out repeatedly. Then without doubt the sudden onsets of that illness will cease. 

And if someone falls in a fit of epilepsy, then - right where they are lying - place a piece of smaragdus in 
their mouth, and their spirit will revive. And after they have got up again and taken the stone from their mouth, 
they should look at it attentively and say: 

‘As the Spirit of the Lord has fulfilled the circle of the earth, 

So may the house of my body be filled with his grace 
That it may never again be afflicted.’ 

They should repeat this again and again on the following days in the mornings, and they will be cured. But they 
should take care always to have the same stone about them and look at it every day in the early morning, and 
while they are looking at it they should say the words given, and in this way they will be healed. 

If you suffer from headache, place the stone in your mouth and warm it with your breath until it is moistened 
from your breathing, and stroke your temples and forehead with the wet stone; next, place the stone in your 
mouth and keep it there for a short hour, and you will feel better. 

For someone with too much ‘flecma’ and too much saliva: first, heat up some strong wine; place a linen cloth 
over a bowl, put a smaragdus stone on the cloth and pour the heated wine over the stone so that the wine strains 
through the cloth; repeat several times as for the preparation of a solution. Mix this wine with bean flour and 
eat often, and drink the prepared wine frequently. This will clear the brain and reduce the ‘flecma’ and saliva 
within it. 

For an attack of gnawing worms: place a linen cloth over the ulcer with a smaragdus stone and tie other 
pieces of linen over it, as for the treatment of a swelling. The reason this should be done is to warm the stone. 
Continue to do it for three days until the worms die. 

2. Hyacinth 

Hyacinth has its origins in fire at the first hour of the day when the air is moderately warm, and thus has more 
air than fire. It therefore senses the air and it changes according to the warmth of the air. Nevertheless it is also 
fire, because it is generated from fire. 

For someone suffering weakness of the eyes, or whose vision is turbid, or whose eyes ‘swerent’ [hurt] - hold 
up the ‘jachant’ [hyacinth] to the sun and it will at once recall its generation from fire and warm up quickly. 
Moisten it immediately in a little saliva and as quickly as possible place it over the eyes so that they are warmed 
by it. Repeat frequently and the eyes will become clear and healthy. 

For anyone who is ‘bezaubert’ [bewitched] by fantasms or magic words and has gone out of their mind : 1 take 
a warm loaf of fine wheat and cut the shape of a cross through its top crust, but without breaking the loaf into 
pieces; draw the stone through the line of the cut on top and say: 


‘May God, who deprived the devil of every precious stone 

after he had broken his commandment, 

drive out from you, N., 

all fantasms and all magic spells, 

and may he release you from all the pain of this madness.’ 

And again, drawing the stone transversely through the bread, say: 

‘Just as the splendour which the devil had 
was taken from him because of his transgression, 
so may this madness too, 

which oppresses you, N., through fantasms and through magic, 

be taken from you, 

and may it depart from you!’ 

Then, take the bread around the line of the cut through which you have passed the hyacinth and give it to the 
suffering person to eat. But if they cannot eat this wheaten bread because of the debility of their body, then take 
unleavened bread, that is ‘derf brot’, and give it to them to eat. But also pass the stone in cruciform through all 
the warm food that the patient eats, that is, through meat, ‘warmuse’ [cooked vegetables] and their other food, 
and cut crosses in it and bless it with the aforesaid words; do this frequently, and the patient will be cured. 

Also for anyone suffering pains in the heart: make the sign of the cross over their heart with the hyacinth and 
say the aforesaid words, and they will feel better. 


3. Onyx 

Onyx is warm and grows at the third hour of the day in thick cloud, when the sun burns powerfully but is 
covered by various rising clouds which prevent it from appearing through them because of their flood of waters. 
Thus the stone does not hold great heat of fire, but it has the warmth of the air, for its origin is in the root of the 
sun and the conglutination of various clouds. Onyx therefore has great virtues against illnesses arising in the 
air. 

For dimness of the eyes and the like, or anything due to ‘augswern’ [complaint of the eyes], place good, pure 
wine in a bronze, copper, or iron receptacle, add onyx to the wine and ‘beizze’ [steep] it for either fifteen or 
thirty days. Then remove the stone, leaving the wine in the receptacle, and touch the eyes each night with a little 
of the wine; they will clear and become healthy. 

For pains in the heart or sides, warm an onyx in your hands or close to your body, also taking wine again and 
heating it in a vessel over a fire; then remove the wine from the fire and hold the onyx over the steaming wine 
so that the sweat coming from the stone mingles with the wine. Finally put the stone in the hot wine and drink 
it as it is, and the heat in your heart or side will cease. 

For a complaint of the stomach, prepare wine with onyx as described and then prepare a ‘sufen’ [soup] from 
the wine with hen’s eggs and flour. Make and eat this frequently; it will purify your stomach and make you 
healthy. For a complaint of the spleen, cook the meat of a goat or lamb, put the cooked meat in the wine and 
onyx mixture as described above and eat the marinaded meat like those dishes made by marinading in vinegar. 
Do this frequently; the spleen will heal and the swelling stop. 

And for anyone who has a strong ‘fiber’ [fever] - place the onyx in vinegar for fifteen days. Remove the stone, 
and with this vinegar flavour and season all your food; eat it thus prepared, and the ‘fiber’ will stop and fade 
easily, because the good warmth of the onyx, mixed with the warmth of the vinegar, will drive out the noxious 
humours in which the fevers originate. 

If you are oppressed by melancholy, focus your attention on the onyx and then put it immediately into your 
mouth; your mental depression will then cease. 

And if ‘schelme’ [cattle sickness] starts attacking and killing your cows, heat some water in a vessel over a 
fire; remove from the fire, hold an onyx over the steaming water to allow the sweat from the onyx to mix with it, 
and then place the stone in the water for three days. Having removed the stone, give the cattle regular drinks of 



the water and sprinkle their feed with it; also, mix their bran with the water and offer it them to eat; do this 
frequently and they will feel better. 


4. Beryl 

Beryl is a warm gemstone which develops, between the third hour and midday, from the foam of water when the 
sun burns it severely. Its power is thus more from air and water than from fire, but nevertheless it has some of 
the properties of fire. And if a man has drunk or eaten poison, then he should ‘schabe’ [place] a little of the beryl 
in ‘queckbronen’ [spring water] or other water and drink it at once. Continue for five days drinking it once a day 
while fasting, and the poison will foam up through vomiting, or it will pass out of him through the rear. 

Whoever keeps a piece of beryl constantly about them, and frequently takes it in their hand and frequently 
focusses on it, will not easily argue with other people, nor will they be ‘stridig’ [quarrelsome], but they will 
remain calm. 


5. Sardonyx 

Sardonyx is warm, and grows each day when the sixth hour has passed and when the first line of the ninth hour 
has gone by; at that time it is nourished by the pure sun, when the sun shines in its purity, because at that time 
the sun begins to cool down; it therefore contains more fire than air or water. It has strong powers in its nature 
and gives a certain virtue to the five human senses and is a remedy for them, because it is born in the purity of 
the sun, when no impurity appears in the brightness of the sun. When someone places the stone on their bare 
skin and also puts it often in their mouth so that their breath touches it, then takes it out and puts it back in 
again, then this will strengthen their intellect and knowledge, and all the senses of their body. Consequently 
great anger, stupidity and indiscipline will be taken from them, and because of their cleanness the devil will hate 
and flee them. And if by their nature a man or woman is burning in carnal desire, then he should place the 
sardonyx on his ‘lanchen’ [loins] and the woman should put it on her umbilicum, and they will have a remedy 
for their libido. But if someone has suffered an acute ‘sucht’ [attack of fever], as soon as they have sweated out 
the fever and are feeling better, then put the stone in a ring on their finger and they will not suffer any relapse of 
the ‘sucht’. 


6. Sapphire [excerpt] 

Sapphire is warm; it grows around the midday period, when the sun burns so vigorously in its heat that the air 
becomes to a certain extent hazy, and then the sun’s splendour from the great quantity of heat which it has at 
that period passes through the air less readily and its splendour at that period appears not as fully as it does 
when the air has cooled a little. Sapphire is therefore opaque and also more akin to fire than to air or water; and 
it signifies the full love of wisdom. 

A person who has ‘vel’ in their eye should hold a sapphire in their hand and warm it there [or in a fire] and 
touch the ‘vel’ in his eye with the moist stone; continue to do this for three days every morning and night, and 
the ‘vel’ will diminish, and disappear. And if your eyes are red with pain and ‘seregent’ [hurt], or if your eyes are 
weak, then place the sapphire in your mouth while fasting and moisten it with saliva of the mouth and then take 
the same saliva that has moistened the stone on your finger and apply it round your eyes so that it also makes 
contact with the inside of your eyes; your eyes will heal and become clear. 

And for a person who is completely ‘virgichtiget’ [suffering from gout] so that they cannot bear the great 
pressure in their head and in the rest of their body, have them put the stone in their mouth, and the ‘gicht’ will 
cease. 



23. Songs from Symphonia 


The Symphony of the Harmony of Celestial Revelations was a collection of songs initially compiled in the 
middle period of Hildegard’s career between the completion of Scivias in 1151 and the beginning of work on The 
Book of Life’s Merits in 1158. Other songs were composed later and added to the collection, the fullest 
manuscript being that of the Riesenkodex of the 1180s. This translation of selected songs is based on the edition 
by Pudentiana Barth, M. Immaculata Ritscher and Joseph Schmidt-Gorg , Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder 
(Salzburg 1969), which follows the oldest manuscript, a compilation of works by Hildegard and Elisabeth that 
was sent to the monastery ofVillers during Hildegard’s lifetime and is now preserved as Codex 9 of the library 
of the monastery of Dendermonde, in Belgium. For ease of comparison, the notes give the numbering of the 
songs in the edition by Barbara Newman, Symphonia ( Ithaca , 1998 ). 

1. O magne pater. Antiphon 1 


O great Father, we are in great need. 

Now therefore we entreat you, we entreat you through your Word 
by which you have filled us with what we lacked. 

May it please you, now, Father, as you see fit, 
to look upon us through your helper, lest we perish 
and your name is darkened within us. 

For your name’s sake, make haste to help us. 

2. O eterne deus. Antiphon 2 


O Eternal God, now may it please you 

to burn in love 

so that we become the limbs 

fashioned in the love you felt 

when you begot your Son 

at the first dawn 

before all creation. 

And consider this need which falls upon us, 
take it from us for the sake of your Son, 
and lead us to the joy of your salvation. 


3 . Ave Maria. Responsory 3 


Hail, Mary, author of life, 
you have rebuilt our salvation. 

You have shaken death 
and destroyed the serpent 
to which Eve rose up 

with head held high in the breath of her pride. 

You trampled it down 

when you gave birth to the Son of God from heaven. 
By the inspiration of the Spirit of God. 


Sweet and loving Mother, we greet you, 

You have granted the world your child sent from heaven, 

By the inspiration of the Spirit of God. 

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 

By the inspiration of the Spirit of God. 

4 . O clarissima mater. Responsory4 


O bright Mother of holy medicine, 

You have poured out the ointment, through your holy Son, 

on the grieving wounds of death 

which Eve originated to the torment of souls. 

You have destroyed death, 
and built up life. 

Pray for us to your Son, 

O Mary, Star of the Sea. 

O giver of life and splendour of joys 
O sweetness of all delights, in you never fading! 

Pray for us to your Son, 

O Mary, Star of the Sea. 

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 
Pray for us to your Son, 

O Mary, Star of the Sea. 


5 . O splendidissima gemma. Antiphon5 


Most splendid of gemstones! 

Bright beauty of the sun! 

He poured upon you, 

as a leaping fountain from the heart of the Father, 

His unique and only Word, 

through whom he made the primal matter of the world 
which Eve the woman threw into confusion. 

In your image, Father, this Word created the human being. 

Therefore, Mary, you are the bright matter 

through which the Word breathed all the virtues forth, 

as once he led forth, in the primal matter of the world, the whole of creation. 

6. Hodie aperuit. Antiphon 


Today is opened to us the closed gate 
which the serpent stifled in a woman. 
And there, in the dawn light shining: 
the flower of the Virgin Mary! 


7- Quia ergo femina. Antiphon 


Because a woman brought death 
a bright Maiden overcame it, 
and so the highest blessing 
in all of creation 
lies in the form of a woman, 
since God has become man 
in a sweet and blessed Virgin. 


8. Cum processit factura. Antiphon 

When creation came forth from the finger of God 

fashioned in God’s image 

created of mixed blood 

along the exile-path of Adam’s fall: 

then the elements received 

the joys of life. 

O Mary, worthy of praise. 

As heavens shine red 
they sound forth your praise. 


13. O virga ac diadema. Sequence 9 

O branch and diadem, in royal purple, 

you are in your chamber, like a protective breastplate. 

You blossom and flourish in a different manner from Adam, 
who brought forth the human race. 

Hail, hail, 

from your womb a different life came forth 

different from the life to which Adam exposed his children. 

O flower, you did not blossom from the dew 

nor from the drops of rain; the air did not soar above you, 

instead the brightness of God brought you forth 

as the noblest branch. 

O branch, God foresaw 

your blossoming on the first day of his creation. 

From his Word he created 
the golden material 
O Maiden worthy of praise. 


How great and powerful is the man’s side, 


out of which God brought forth the form of a woman, 
he made her as the mirror of all his beauty, 
as the loving embrace of all his creation. 

And so the heavenly instruments sound in harmony, 
and all the earth marvels that God loved you so much, 

O Mary, worthy of praise. 

How sorely we lament and mourn 
that harshness of guilt came into a woman 
through the counsel of the serpent. 

For the woman that God had established as the mother of all 
afflicted her heart with the wounds of ignorance 
and gave to her offspring the fullness of suffering. 

But, O Dawn, from your womb 

a new sun came forth, 

who wiped away all the sins of Eve. 

Through you he brought forth a benediction greater by far 
than all the harm ever afflicted by Eve on humanity. 

Therefore, Saviour Maiden, you brought forth 
a new light to the human race, 
gather together the limbs of your Son 
in heavenly harmony. 


15. Spiritus sanctus vivificans vita. Antiphon 


Holy Spirit, quickening life, 
moving all things, the root in all creation, 
who washes all things of impurity, 
removing sins and soothing wounds 
who is shining light and laudable life, 
wakening and rewakening all things. 


16. Caritas abundat. Antiphon 11 


Love abounds in all things, 

excels from the depths to beyond the stars, 

is lovingly disposed to all things. 

She has given the king on high 
the kiss of peace. 


17. O gloriosissimi. Antiphon 12 


Angels, living light most glorious! 


Beneath the Godhead in burning desire 
in the darkness and mystery of creation 
you look on the eyes of your God 
never taking your fill: 

What glorious pleasures take shape within you 
and remain intact from all the evil work 
which first arose in your companion, 
the angel of perdition, 
who wished to soar 

above the inward hidden pinnacle of God. 

From there he fell, and plunged to his destruction; 
and yet he delivered 
the instruments of his fall 
to the work of God’s finger. 

26. O speculum columbe. Antiphon for John the Evangelist 1 ^ 

Mirror of the dove in the chastest of figures, 
you have seen the breadth of mystery 
in the purest of wells. 

A wondrous flower 
never fading or falling, 
planted by the divine gardener! 

Sweetest repose, embracing the sun, 

you are the beloved son of the Lamb, 

in chosen friendship, you are the new branch. 

27. O dulcis electe. Responsory for John the Evangelist 1 ^ 


Beloved chosen one, 

you burn with fire, and shine forth as a root; 

in the splendour of the Father 

you illumined the mysteries, 

you entered the chamber of chastity 

in the golden city built by the King 

when he received the sceptre of the regions: 

Send us your help on our pilgrims’ way. 

You increased the rain 

which those who went before you 

caused to fall 

on the greenness of the pastors of the Church. 

Send us your help on our pilgrims’ way. 

58. o vis aeternitatis. Responsory 1 ^ 
Power of eternity, you who ordained all things in your heart, 


Through your word all things were created, as you so willed. 

This very word of yours took on the same bodily form 
that came from Adam. 

In so doing he freed our human bodies from the greatest of pain. 

How great is the goodness of our Saviour 

who liberated all things through his incarnation, 

whom God breathed forth without the fetters of sin. 

In so doing he freed our human bodies from the greatest of pain. 

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 

In so doing he freed our human bodies from the greatest of pain. 

59. O virtus sapientie 1 ^ 


Power of Wisdom, 
circling all things, 
comprehending all things, 
on one path, which has life. 

Three wings: 
one soars in the height, 
one exudes from the earth, 
one soars everywhere. 

Praise to you, as befits you, Wisdom. 


24. Two Christmas Homilies [Pitra (ed.), homilies Ili and Ilii] 


In her commentaries, apparently designed as homilies on the readings of the Gospel at particular church 
services and festivals during the Christian year, Hildegard allowed full rein to her allegorical interests, often 
with bold and innovative interpretations. These two homilies for Christmas reveal a strong Platonic vein in her 
thinking. In the first, the literal events of Luke’s Nativity narrative take on added significance when seen in the 
light of the events of creation and redemption. In the second, the events are internalized and interpreted in a 
new, psychological reading that complements the first. Both homilies illustrate the tendency in medieval 
reading to allow for different layers and levels of interpretation. The text does not have one but several 
meanings. 


Sermon on the Nativity ofthe Lord. For the first mass 2 [Luke 2:1-14] 

[1] There went out a decree, that is an ancient counsel, 3 /rom Caesar Augustus, i.e. from the heavenly Father, 
that the whole world should be described - that all of creation should issue forth. 

[2] This first description - creation - was made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria; that is, by the Father’s Word, 
which was the head of the whole act of creation and which was to be made incarnate. 

[3] And all went to be enrolled, every one into his own city. Every creature went to perfect its beginning 
according to its nature and according to the function for which it was made, whether for walking, swimming or 
flying. 

[4] And Joseph, the human being, also went up to that height from Galilee, out ofthe city of Nazareth. The 
human being ‘went up’ from all the other creatures because he was placed above them. And he went into 
Judaea, to the city of David, which means ‘it comprehends all things’, to the place called Bethlehem, which 
means ‘rationality’; because he was ofthe house and family of David, in other words, because God had created 
him in his own image and likeness. 

[5] To register, that is, to register the God from whom he came forth when he was created and to whom he 
returned when he had been redeemed. And he went up with Mary his espoused wife, i.e. with the rationality 
entrusted to him. In other words, the human being was able to use this gift of rationality to discern where he 
should listen out for God’s command. 

[6] And it came to pass when they were there - that is, when the human being had gained discretion in his 
rationality - that her days were accomplished when she should be delivered. It was then that the human being 
received God’s command through his sense of hearing. 

[7] And when she heard God’s command she brought forth her firstborn son; that is to say, she brought forth an 
intention good in its first beginnings. And she wrapped him in swaddling clothes, in other words, she wrapped 
this good intention in true desires. And she laid him in a manger, she humbly submitted herself to good will. 
Because there was no room for them in the inn: because as yet there was no secret place of incipient evil. 

[8] And there were in the same region shepherds - the mind’s watchers in that region of self-knowledge - who 
were keeping watch by night, keeping watch, that is, against the night of the knowledge of evil, over their flock, 
i.e. over all their works. 

[9] And, behold, an angel ofthe Lord stood by them, that is, the angelic guardian was present with them; 
therefore they came to know the angels. And the brightness of God, i.e. the gifts of God, shone round about 
them in order that they might know good works. And they feared with a great fear, so that they would feel 
anxiety about what things should be done. 

[10-11] And the angel said to them, showing them great honour in their fear, ‘Fear not for, behold, I bring you 
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, to all just doers of good works in thought and deed. For 
this day is born to you a Saviour, in order that salvation may have its birth within you, who is Christ the Lord, 
for you are made in the image and likeness of God, in the city of David, so that your good deeds might be 
worked in great strength.’ 

[12] “And this shall be a sign unto you, showing that these things are true. You shall find the infant, that is, the 
good intention, wrapped in the swaddling clothes of just desires, and laid in the manger of good will.’ 

[13] And suddenly, when the created human being was placed in Paradise, there was with the angel guardian a 
multitude, i.e. a great wonder in the heavenly host, praising God on account of the human being, because the 
divine works shone out in him and because rationality was active within him; for an angel is rational only in 
praising, whereas a human being is rational in both praise and action. The great multitude of the heavenly host 
was praising God, because the angels in seeing the human being came to know God more! 


[14] They sang Glory to God in the highest, because God is glorious in the heights with the angels, and on earth 
peace - given in heaven - to men of good will, because, before the fall, Adam was in good will. 



Another Reading [Luke 2:1—14] 


[1] There went out a decree, that is something created, from Caesar Augustus, that is by its own will, that the 
whole world should be described - that it should be extended throughout the whole body. 

[2] This first description - that is, this first extension - was made by Cyrinus, the governor of Syria; that is, by 
the physical appetite. 

[3] And all the virtues and the vices went to be enrolled , every one into his own city, i.e. each being directed to 
its own function. 

[4] And Joseph, that is, ‘good desire’, also went up from Galilee, which means ‘habit’. And he went out of the city 
of Nazareth, i.e. the ‘cultivation’ that habit has gained through rationality. Then he went into Judaea, on ‘the 
strait way of the knowledge of God’, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, i.e. ‘salvation of the soul’, 
because he was of the house, i.e. part of creation, and of the family of David, i.e. knowing good and evil. 

[5] The good desire was to be registered with Mary his espoused wife who was with child, that is, to be 
interpreted with love and conjoined to give birth to the virtues. 

[6] And it came to pass that when they were there her days were accomplished when she should be delivered - 
it came to pass that when the good desire had thus turned to love, the days were accomplished when the 
splendour of good works should appear. 

[7] And she brought forth her firstborn son - obedience, the first virtue - and she wrapped him in the 
swaddling clothes of her embraces. And she laid him in a manger of humility because there was no room for 
them in the inn, i.e. in the place of vanity. 

[8] And there were in the same region shepherds - the shepherds are the anxiety which appears in that same 
will to do good deeds, abiding in the field, watching in abstinence, and keeping watch, i.e. with prayer and vigil, 
by night, the time when the human beings turn from their sins, over their flock, i.e. over their good works in 
order that they might preserve them. 

[9] And, behold, an angel of the Lord, representing the grace of God, stood by them, and enclosed them. And the 
brightness of God, i.e. God’s help, shone round about them and sustained them. And they feared with a great 
fear, because they are still in fear as to how they are to overcome the devil. 

[10] And the angel, that is the grace of God, said to them: Fear not, that is to say ‘do not doubt’, for, behold, I 
bring you good tidings of great joy, a great virtue in the breath of life, which shall be to all people because it is 
common to all human beings. 

[11] For this day is born to you a Saviour - in you is born holy rationality, which is Christ the Lord coming 
from God, in the city of David, that is, in the bulwark of all holiness. 

[12] And this shall be a sign unto you in a revelation: you shall find the infant - obedience - wrapped in the 
swaddling clothes of your embraces and laid in the manger of your humility. 

[13-14] And suddenly, for it will be quickly, there was with the angel, i.e. with the grace of God, a multitude of 
the heavenly army, i.e. a multitude of virtues, praising God with the sweetest sound and saying: ‘Glory to God in 
the highest ’, i.e. in the knowledge of men, for God is able to make all things and lead the sinner back to life. And 
on earth peace to men of good will, because God has returned to the earth to deal with the adverse troubles of 
the vanities, so that people may have the peace and quiet of good will when they do good things freely and are 
not prevented by weakness. And God will be the peacemaker among human beings. 



ALLEGORIES OF JUSTICE AND LOVE 


25. The Iron Mountain (Scivias 1 , 1) 


One of Hildegard’s earliest visions - given prominence as the first text and illustration in Scivias - depicts a 
bright figure seated on an iron mountain. On the literal level, it is a striking and often surreal picture, but it is 
also an allegory in which every detail has a corresponding meaning in the religious and moral life. As text and 
iconogi'aphy make clear, what the picture represents is the divine figure enthroned above his kingdom. Other 
details add to the interpretation. At the foot of the mountain stand two further allegorical figures. The first is 
fear of the Lord’, seen as a vaguely human form covered all over with the many eyes of discernment, an idea 
that derives from Proverbs 1:7, ‘The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge... ’ This is the sapiential side 
of Hildegard’s teachings, which she was to develop in the rest of her writing career. The second figure is that of 
poverty of spirit’, whose face cannot be seen because of the light pouring down on her head from the figure of 
God on the mountain. The picture thus graphically illustrates the idea from Christ’s Sermon on the Mount: 
‘Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven’ (Matthew 5:3). This points to the ethically 
and socially engaged side of Hildegard’s theology; again it is something that never leaves her, and it is still 
present at the end of her writing career some thirty years later. 

Two other aspects of the vision described below should be noted. First, there are the sparks, representing the 
virtues, a recurring motif in her work. Secondly, there are the two types of people in the mountain, who 
symbolize, morally, the weak and the strong. In the explanations that follow, justice and the practice of justice 
emerge as the main themes of the vision, while in the opening words Hildegard’s primary vocation as prophet 
and teacher is emphasized. 



[Scivias I, i] 


I saw the likeness of a great mountain the colour of iron, and on it sat a figure in great brightness, so bright that 
it dazzled my eyes. Light-filled shadows stretched out on either side: they were wings of astounding breadth and 
height. And before this figure, at the roots of the mountain, there stood an image covered with eyes, and because 
of the eyes I could not make out the human form beneath. And in front of her was the figure of a child dressed 
in a pale tunic and white shoes. I could not see her face because of the bright light pouring down on her head 
from the man seated on the mountain. But many living sparks sprang forth from the man on the mountain and 
hovered round these figures most pleasingly. In the mountain itself many small windows were visible, at which 
there appeared the faces of men, some pale, some pure. 

And suddenly the man seated on the mountain called out in a loud and penetrating voice and said: 

Human creature in your weakness, in the dust and ashes of the earth! Cry out and speak of the entry to 
lasting salvation, so that the people may be taught who see the inner pith of the meaning of the writings but will 
not speak or preach them! For they are lukewarm and sluggish in their keeping of God’s justice. Unlock the 
mysteries which they have so fearfully and fruitlessly concealed in a hidden field. 

Pour forth therefore in a fountain of abundance; stream out in your knowledge of mysteries so that those 
who wish to hurt you because of Eve’s transgression will be struck by the force of your irrigating torrent. 

For you do not receive this profound and penetrating discernment from a human being. Rather, you receive it 
from the heavenly and awe-inspiring Judge on high, where this glory will shine forth with a clear bright radiance 
among the bearers of light. 

Rise up, therefore, cry out and speak forth those things made known to you by the great strength of divine 
assistance. For the one who rules his creation with mercy and power pours out the brightness of heavenly 
enlightenment on those who fear him and serve him with love in a spirit of humility. And those who persevere 
on the way of justice he will lead to the joys of the eternal vision. 

I. The strength and stability of the eternal kingdom of God 

‘I saw the likeness of a great mountain the colour of iron, and on it sat a figure in great brightness, so bright that 
it dazzled my eyes. Light-filled shadows stretched out on either side: they were wings of astounding breadth and 
height.’ 

The ‘great iron mountain’ which you see represents God’s eternal kingdom. In its strength and stability it can 
never be brought down by change or mutability. The ‘man seated in the bright light that dazzles your eyes’ is the 
one who rules all the circle of the earth in the brightness of his unceasing glory. In his eternal divinity he can 
never be grasped by human understanding. The ‘light-filled wings’ are the soft and gentle protection, the blessed 
defence of warning and reproof, the just and pious demonstration of ineffable justice brought about by true 
equity. 


2. The fear of the Lord 

‘And before this figure, at the roots of the mountain, there stood an image covered with eyes, and because of the 
eyes I could not make out the human form beneath.’ 

The ‘image covered with eyes’ represents fear of the Lord in the presence of God. She contemplates the 
kingdom of God in all humility. Covered with the discernment of good and fair intentions, she practises 
enthusiasm and constancy in human behaviour. And this is why you cannot see the human form beneath the 
cover of the discerning eyes: because her sharp-sighted gaze dispels all the obliviousness to God’s justice which 
human beings often feel in their jaded hearts. And her vigilance is such that it cannot be diverted by the 
weakness of mortal inquiry. 


3. The poor in spirit 

The fear of the Lord is followed by the poor in spirit: ‘And in front of her was the figure of a child dressed in a 
pale tunic and white shoes.’ 



In the devotion of humility, poverty of spirit is held in place in her blessed state by fear of the Lord. And she 
does not care for the elation or leap of the heart; instead she loves simplicity and sobriety of mind. In the pale 
colour of her tunic, she attributes her just deeds to God and not to herself - hence the pale colour also of her 
worshipful subjection - and she follows faithfully in the bright footsteps of the Son of God. 

‘I could not see her face because of the bright light pouring down on her head from the man seated on the 
mountain.’ 

He who worthily rules the whole of creation floods the power and strength of that blessed state with such 
radiance of presence that you cannot grasp it with the weak eyes of mortal perception. For he who holds the 
riches of heaven subjected himself in humility to the state of poverty. 

4. How the virtues proceeding from God protect the God-fearing and the poor in spirit 

‘But many living sparks sprang forth from the man on the mountain and hovered round these figures most 
pleasingly.’ 

Diverse and powerful virtues emerge like sparks of lightning from the all-powerful God. With their help and 
protection, they surround those who truly fear the Lord and those who truly love poverty of spirit. The virtues 
embrace them ardently and win them over. 

5. How people’s motivations cannot be hidden from God’s awareness 

‘In the mountain itself many small windows were visible, at which there appeared the faces of men, some pale, 
some pure.’ 

The meaning is this: people’s motivations cannot be concealed from the depth and profundity of God’s acute 
awareness. All too often they themselves either reveal their lack of warmth or manifest their purity. In their 
hearts and actions, some tire themselves out and fall asleep in disgrace, while others spur themselves on and 
remain vigilant in great honour. 


6. Solomon on the same topic 

Solomon testifies in a similar way, according to my will, saying: ‘He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack 
hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.’ 1 

This means that if people do not practise justice and if they refuse to stamp out evil or cancel their debts, they 
will become weak and poor. In their idleness they will remain apart from the marvellous workings of divine 
favour. But as for those who practise powerful works of salvation and run on the path of truth - they will reach 
the springing fountain of glory, from which they will gain the precious riches of earth and heaven! 


26. The Man Looking East and South (from The Book of Life’s Merits I) 


The main focus of the six visions of The Book of Life’s Merits (1158-63) is the ‘Man.’ The full symbolic and 
allegorical significance of this figure is made clear as the author moves on to the explanation and exegesis of 
her vision in the second half of each vision (for an excerpt, see 28). 

Part One: The Man Looking East and South 

And I saw 1 a Man of such stature that from the tops of the clouds in the sky he reached down into the abyss; so 
that from above his shoulders he was higher than the clouds in the bright ether, and from below his shoulders 
down to his thighs he was beneath the clouds in another white cloud; from his thighs to his knees he was in the 
earthly air, from his knees to the calves of his legs in the earth, and from his calves to the soles of his feet in the 
waters of the abyss (but in such a way that he also stood above the abyss). He had turned towards the East, so 

that he looked 2 both East and South. 

Now his face shone with such splendour that I could not perfectly see it. The white cloud was near his mouth 
in the likeness of a trumpet, full of the rapid soundings of all musical sounds, and when the man blew a breath, 
it sent out three winds: one bore a cloud of fire; one bore a cloud of storms; one bore a cloud of light. And each 
cloud was supported by its wind. 

While the wind bearing the cloud of fire remained before the man’s face, the other two winds descended with 
their clouds to his chest, and there they expanded their breath outwards. But the wind that had stayed before the 
man’s face extended its cloud from the East to the South. 

In the cloud of fire were myriads of fiery beings; and they were all one life, in one will and one conjunction. 
And in their presence a writing tablet^ was laid out, filled with feathers. The tablet soared in the precepts of God 

when the precepts of God bore it aloft. And the knowledge of God4 had inscribed hidden mysteries upon it 
which the myriads of beings observed with one unified devotion. And when they had studied what was written 

the divine virtue came upon them and like a single mighty trumpet they sounded forth with one soundS in all 
varieties of music. 

Now the wind bearing the aforesaid storm cloud dispersed it from the South to the West, in length and 
breadth like a road greater than any human intellect could comprehend. And in the cloud were a great number 
of blessed beings; they all had the spirit of life in them and no one could possibly count them. Their voices were 
like the sound of many waters, and they said: ‘We have our habitations, just as the maker of the wind desired; 
but when will we finally receive them? If we had them with us, we would rejoice more fully than we do now.’ 

But the aforementioned 1 multitude of beings in the aforesaid cloud of fire answered them in a voice of praise 
saying: ‘When the Deity takes hold of his trumpet, he will send forth thunder, lightning, and flaming fire upon 
the earth. He will strike the fire contained within the sun, so that all the earth will be moved; all this will be 
when God chooses to reveal his great signs. Then, with the trumpet blast, he will call out to all the nations from 

all the varieties of the tongues of the earth; and in this way you will receive your habitations.’? 

And the wind bearing the aforesaid cloud of light extended it from the East to the North. But an immense 
darkness of great density and horror came from the East and extended towards the cloud of light, yet because of 
that cloud of light it could advance no further. Sun and moon appeared in the cloud of light; in the sun was a 

lion, in the moon a goat.^ And the sun was both above the heavens and in the heavens, and it shone both on the 
earth and below the earth; and thus it went forth in its rising and thus returned in its setting. But when the sun 
went forth the lion went forth with it, and he seized great spoil; and when the sun returned, the lion returned 
with the sun and in the sun, and he roared out for his joy. Likewise the moon and with it the goat followed the 
sun in each stage of its rising and setting. Then the wind gave forth a blast and said: ‘The woman will bear fruit, 
and the goat will wage war against the North.’ 

And there was in the aforementioned darkness a countless number of lost souls, who had turned away from 
the singing of the beings in the South, for they did not wish to be their companions. Their leader was called the 


‘misleader’,9 for they followed the deeds of the one who was struck down by Christ and no longer had any 
power. And listen! They all cried out in a mournful voice saying: ‘Woe to that noxious and terrible work which 
fled from life and moves within us towards death!’ 

Next I saw a cloud coming from the North , 10 reaching towards the darkness. It was arid and joyless, for the 
sun had neither touched it nor shown itself to it. It was full of evil spirits which wandered back and forth within 
it scheming plots against humanity, yet they blushed for shame in the presence of the Man. 

And I heard the ancient serpent 11 say to himself: ‘I will prepare all my forces of strength and wage war 
against my enemies with all I can muster!’ 

And he sent forth from his mouth among humankind the froth of his many impurities, and with them his 
vices, and he inflated them with his great mockery, and he said: ‘Ha! They call themselves suns for the light of 
their works, but I will turn them into noxious terrors of the night!’ 

And he blew out a poison cloud which covered all the earth like black smoke, and from it came a great roar, 
saying: ‘Let no one honour a God they cannot see and know! How can they worship what they cannot know!’ 

In the black cloud I saw the images of many kinds of vices ; 12 seven of which I considered, in the following 
manner. 


27. The Seven Vices and Virtues (from The Book of Life’s Merits I) 


In the following psychomachia, or ‘battle of the soul’, the various vices and virtues are personified and 
endowed with characteristics based on aspects of the human, animal, plant, demonic or angelic spheres of life. 
They speak and act, and have different personalities, and in the subsequent exegesis they are given names, 
usually based on abstract nouns or concepts, such as the first vice, ‘Love of the World’, and his/her opponent, 
the virtue ‘Heavenly Love’ Unlike the mainstream tradition of the Psychomachia of Prudentius, in which all the 
personifications are female, in Hildegard the gender of these figures is hinted at but not formally stated. In the 
case of the first image, it seems best, from the context of the description given, to picture the figure as a man, 
perhaps a medieval ‘wild man’ with some of the characteristics of the inhabitants of the margins of the world 
(Ethiopia was on the edge of medieval maps), as described for instance in such medieval texts as The Wonders 

of the East 1 or Mandeville’s Travels. 


The Book of Life’s Merits I 


1. The first figure had the form of a man and the blackness of an Ethiopian, and he stood naked, grasping round 
a tree below the branches with his arms and his legs. The tree flourished with all kinds of blossom, and he 
gathered the flowers to him with his hands and said: 

‘I hold all the kingdoms of the world with all their flowers and adornments. So why dry up when I possess all 
power of greenness? Why live in senile old age, when I can flourish in youthfulness? Why keep in the dark the 

beautiful vision of the eyes? If I did that, I would blush for shame! 2 Give me the beauty of this world, and I will 
hold it with joy! All other life is unknown to me! The fables I hear of it are meaningless!’ 

When he had said this, the aforesaid tree dried up to the roots and plunged into the darkness, and the figure 
fell with it. 

2. And from the aforesaid storm-cloud I heard a voice respond to the first figured 

‘This is great foolishness, for you desire to have life in a spark in the ashes; and you do not seek that life 
which never fades with the beauty of youth, and never weakens in old age. You lack all light, you are in 
blackness and darkness, wound up in human self-will like a worm; you live for the moment, then dry up like 
hay! You fall into the lake of perdition, and there have your end with all you embrace, which in your present 
state you call your flowers! 

‘I am a column of celestial harmony; I direct all the joys of life. I do not scorn life, but I trample all hateful 
things, and I disparage you. For I am the mirror of all virtues, in which the faithful may see themselves clearly. 
But you run the paths of the night! Your hands are busy with failure!’ 

The second figure had the form of a hunting-dog, trained to course for his prey.4 He stood on his hind legs, 
reaching up with his front paws round an upright staff, and his tail wagged playfully as he said: 

3. ‘What is happiness for a man and what moves him moderately to laughter? Is there not a beautiful breath in 
his soul and should he not be a harmony of sound? What is a man who is constantly preoccupied with 
mortality? A nobody! So let him be happy while he can be happy.’ 

4. And again from the storm-cloud I heard a voiced give a response to the image: 

‘You criminal! You are like the wind blowing about in the squalid manners of playful men, but in your 
fickleness you are like the worms digging up the ground. For when people see you, they fall in with you, and you 
run to greet them like a dog; in this way you persuade them to want only what they desire. You proffer your 
useless and criminal words, and you strike a wound in the hearts of men. You frame your deeds according to the 
letter of the law, and so you catch men more easily. 

‘But I am the belt of sanctity and the cloak of honesty. I am an honoured guest at the nuptials of the king. 
There I attend in joy and discipline, and there I appear in all the trappings of righteousness.’ 

The third figure resembled a man, except that he had a long crooked nose, his hands were the paws of a bear, 
and his feet were like the claws of a gryphon. He had black hair, and was dressed in pale clothing. ^ 

5. He said: ‘It is better to be playful than sad. Play is not wickedness! Do not all who know God rejoice and sing? 
The heavens and all creation are full of joy; therefore I too will rejoice! If I appeared sad before my fellows, they 
would hate me and shun me. I will do no such thing! I will try the many kinds of play - may all have their joy 
with me! God created the air which carries sweet sounds to me, the air which brings me the greenness of 
flowers, the air where I feast on all the sights of my eyes! Why should I not rejoice in all these things? Humans 
with animals and animals with humans; all of them play and amuse themselves together. This is as it should 
be!’ 

6. And again I heard the response of the voice from the storm-cloudh 

‘You are idolatry, since you act in all things according to your self-will, and you will be a dead sound made by 
human hand. Your will is both human and animal since your behaviour is sometimes human, sometimes 


animal. But all your behaviour is based not on living but on dead creatures, since you reach out for what you 
desire, and you walk in the paths of whim and vanity. 

‘But I blush at all this, I hide under the wings of the cherubim; I learn the mysteries of God in the books and 
commandments of God, and in all heavenly matters I am vitality. For I see with the eyes of the innocent, and 
everywhere by the practice of honesty I discern the will of God, from which you flee in your unseeing 
ignorance!’ 

The fourth figure was like a dense cloud of smoke in the shape of a man, though it did not have any limbs of 
human form except for large black eyes that appeared within; it moved neither up nor down, nor from side to 

side, but remained in the aforesaid darkness, motionless. ^ 

7. And it spoke: 

‘I have designed nothing and created nothing. So why should I labour for any good cause? Why tear myself to 

pieces?^ I will do no such thing! I will concern myself with people only if they profit me. Let God who created 
everything decide and provide for everything! And if I make smooth-sounding talk, inquire into the affairs of 
others, how will it benefit me? I will do them no harm, but I won’t do them any good! For if I had so much 
compassion in me that I could not get any rest, where would I be then? And what kind of life would I lead if I 
had to respond to every voice of happiness or sorrow? I only know myself: all the others should do the same!’ 

8. And again I heard the response of the voice from the aforementioned storm-cloud: 10 

‘You creature of stone! What are you saying? The plants and flowers proffer scents to other plants; the stone 

presents its moisture 11 to other stones; every creature extends embraces to its fellows. All creatures serve the 
human race; and in their service they generously provide humanity with good things. But you are not worthy of 
receiving even the form of a human being! All you have in you are cruel eyes with no mercy! You are a bitter 
cloud of smoke in the malignity of darkness! 

‘But I am in the air and dew; I am sweet herb in all greenness. My heart is full, ready to grant any kind of 
assistance, for I was present in that first Let there be out of which all created things proceeded that now do 
service for humanity. But you remain out there, excluded! 

‘With my eyes I survey all needs; I unite myself to them; I lead all the broken back to health; I am a healing 
balm for every pain. And all my sayings are fair and just. But you are quite simply bitter smoke!’ 

The fifth figure appeared to have a human head, except that his left ear was like the ear of a hare and so big that 

it covered the whole head. 12 The rest of his body resembled the body of a worm, a boneless creature wound up 
in its lair like an infant wrapped in cloths. 

9. Trembling with fear, it spoke: ‘I will not cause injury to anyone, and in this way I will not become an exile 
without hope or consolation. For if I were to injure others, I would jeopardize my present standing and be 
without friends. I will honour the nobility and the rich, but I will care nothing for the saints or the poor, for they 
cannot bring me profit. 

‘I wish to be peaceful to all, so that I will not perish. For if I fight with anyone, they will perhaps strike back; 
and if I do someone an injury, they will do me a greater one. As long as I am among people I will remain at 
peace with them. And whether they do good or ill, I will remain silent. For it is better for me occasionally to lie 
and deceive rather than tell the truth; it is better also to gain rather than lose, and to flee the strong rather than 
fight against them. Where indeed would be the profit in starting something that I could not finish? The 
victorious and the wise make fun of me. But let them have what they have; for my part, I will have the house 
that I have chosen. Often those who speak the truth lose their possessions, and those who fight are sometimes 
killed.’ 

10. And again I heard the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: 1 ^ ‘In the first error of speaking against 
God you began to err, and you refused to follow justice; and thus in your trembling stupor you have wandered 
into exile, and thus in the unreliability of your favours you have deceived people. For you have no honesty about 
you. But I hold the sword of the powerful virtues of God and with it I cut away all injustice; and I will draw that 


same sword and strike you in the jaw! I will harden my heart against you, for you are ash among ashes; and 
whatever you desire and gather to yourself is mean and paltry. All life lying in ashes and all the empty vanities 
of this world is not what I want, but I desire to reach the springing source. For I fight against the ancient 
serpent, and I destroy all his spoils with the mystery of the scriptures of God, in which I always contend against 
the missile showers of the enemy; and so I remain, in the one true God.’ 

The sixth figure had the face of a man, except that his mouth was like the mouth of a scorpion and the white of 
his eyes stood out around his pupils; his arms also resembled human arms, but his crooked hands were long 
claws; he had the chest, stomach and back of a crab, and his feet and legs were like those of locusts and vipers. 
He stood entangled within the spokes of a mill-wheel with his hands grasping the upper spokes of the wheel and 
his feet resting on the lower spokes. There was no hair on his head, and his whole body was bare. But from his 

mouth he emitted many flames of fire like burning brands. 1 4 

n. And he said: ‘I trample and overthrow all that cause me harm. Should I merely tolerate any injury? What you 
do not wish to be done to you, do not do to me! Whoever does me harm I stab with my sword and strike with my 
clubs!’ 

12. And again I heard the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: ^ ‘I have sounded in the heights and 
touched the earth; I have exuded healing balm from the earth. But you are true deception! You are a drinker of 
blood! You are always of the North! 

‘But I am a mild breeze of all greenness, bringing forth flowers and fruits of all virtues, establishing them 
firmly in the minds of women and men. Whatever I see I bring to completion; I persevere in all things. I trample 
no one down but hold everything in peacefulness, and no one condemns me. But when you build a tower, I 
destroy it with one word, and I scatter all its spoils. Thus you will perish. But I will remain in eternity.’ 

The seventh figure had human form from his head to his loins, except that his hands were the hands of an ape. 
From below his loins he resembled a goat, but his feet were so deep in the aforesaid darkness that I could not 

perfectly make them out. He also wore no clothes and appeared quite naked. 1 

13. And he spoke: ‘A sweet life and a beautiful life I find within me. Why should I abstain from it? For this life in 
which I am created was given me by God. Why should it matter if there is pleasure in my flesh? At first copper 
seems hard and black in appearance, but afterwards it shines like gold - so likewise if there is any tarnish to my 
flesh, it is not reprehensible. There are many in the blindness of this life who do not know what they are doing. 
For my part, I know this life and I intend to keep it!’ 

14. And again I heard the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: ‘You naked creature! Why do you not 
blush with shame in mistaking a blind and mute life for that life in which there is no darkness of night? In your 
behaviour you have transgressed all justice and truth, for you do not live a rational life! 

‘But I know that this worldly life will dry up like hay; therefore I sigh for a life that will not fail. I draw to me 
the harmony of heaven and all the angelic spiritual joys; I can never have my fill, for I have my fellowship with 
them, and I will never depart from them.’ 

15. And I saw that the aforementioned Man had drawn a three-edged sword and fixed it to his neck by the hilt, 
and he swept it back and forth, ready to strike. And the sword spoke: 

‘As Zeal of all zeal, I wage war against the North Wind and all who inhabit it! Who can withstand me in the 
fight? No one! For I am not formed of matter coming together in conjunction. Man with woman did not 
summon me into existence; but I control all works in every species. For God formed man from the soil of the 
earth and in man he carried out all his creative work, and I look to God as in a mirror.’ 


28. The Voice from Heaven (from The Book of Life’s Merits I) 


Hildegard was at pains to emphasize that in her visions and prophecies she not only saw unknown images and 
mysteries but also heard their interpretation as a voice from heaven speaking to her. What is not always clear 
in The Book of Life’s Merits and other works is where the modern editor or translator is to punctuate the text. 
Where does the ‘voice from heaven’ actually finish speaking? The answer to this is uncertain, and perhaps 
deliberately so. The voice from heaven merges with the voice of the human visionary and exegete. But 
Hildegard is serious about her visionary experiences, and she relates them to the experience told in Paul’s Letter 
to the Corinthians of how a man was taken up to the third heaven where he heard ‘hidden words, which it is 
not permitted for anyone to speak’. 



From The Book of Life’s Merits I 


16. Then I heard a voice from heaven saying: 

‘Who among all creatures can enumerate the works of God? And how many are there who inhabit the 
kingdom of God? And who are they, and how many are they and what are they who talk among themselves and 

speak in favour of the black schism 1 and seek their god in the North wind and worship him there? All the just 
things instituted by God they perversely sift and scatter, and they tear them apart in their minds saying: “This 
kind of life is truly good, while that is bad.” And so instead of God they have their own knowledge, but they do 
not know what they are doing!’ 

17. For the works of God that are worked through humanity remain in everlasting life, as the words of Ezekiel 
also show when he says about the four living creatures: 

‘And as for the likeness of their faces: there was the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right side of 
all the four, and the face of an ox on the left side of all the four, and the face of an eagle over all the four.’ 2 

The meaning of this passage is as follows. The work of the activity of God is man, and this work is from God.3 
The ‘face of the man’ signifies the goodness of God, through which humanity has the perception of the 
senses. 

The ‘face of the lion’ represents the power of God, in which God gave reason to humanity. And this is on the 
right because the goodness and power of God through the understanding of the greatness of good works are like 
wings which extend divine inspiration. 

The ‘face of the ox’ indicates the sacrifice which is God, and it demonstrates to humanity how to sacrifice to 
God. And this is on the left because in the act of sacrifice something is lacking: one thing is given and another is 
relinquished. Similarly whoever offers their will to God meditates partly on heavenly and partly on earthly 
things. For in the sacrifice God draws human beings to himself; and he inspires them to make themselves also a 
sacrifice to God. 

The ‘face of the eagle’ signifies the knowledge of God, which gives knowledge to humankind and the 
possibility of the knowledge of how to please God. This exceeds all other virtues, for it is an awesome power 
within us and it is the life of the human race; and this life will never fail; but it breathes everywhere and sees 
everywhere, and it appears in men and women like the stars in the firmament. 

18. But though there is great knowledge in us, there is no person able to enumerate the works of God or to count 
the number of people who will come into the possession of the heavenly places, for just as the divine works are 
innumerable so also are the people who through those marvellous works will attain to the heavenly mansions. 
But neither will they be able to count the numbers of people who, led astray by the devil’s promptings, will make 
their habitation with the devil. God, however, knows the numbers of all beings. 

19. There are very many secrets in God which he reveals to no one as they really are, but only in part, according 
to his will and pleasure. For he alone knows all things, as he also contains them and preserves what he has 

made, for he is in everything according to the disposition of his grace.4 This is shown by the present vision that 
you see before you, for the ‘Man of such stature that from the tops of the clouds in the sky he reached down into 
the abyss’ signifies God. 

20. He is called ‘Man’ for good reason, because all power and all living things proceed from him. 

21. He is also the same man of whom the prophet speaks: ‘The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir 

up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies . ’5 The meaning of this 
is as follows. 

Before the ancient days the Lord had gone forth to the heights of his power, so that his power was life to the 
living in every species of creature, and so that the life which he made had the potential to go forth into the 
multiple diversity of all creatures. And the same Man by his ancient counsel established all good things 
abundantly, and he so fully ordained the edifice of the virtues that no empty space could be found within it. 

Thus he fought in great fullness against his enemies, and at their heart is that Pride who attempts to climb 


before he has seen the ladder and who tries to sit down before he has placed his seat, and whose work is idle 
rumour; and when all fails he advances to his destruction. 

But the same Man in the fullness of his manly works awakened an anger like a burning flame in the order of 
the angels, which totally defeated the enemy when he tried to engulf heaven with the darkness of his malice. 

And so a great cry was raised in the full power of the will of God and in the joy of victory, and the host of angels 
gave voice saying: ‘Who is like God?’ In this cry - like a powerful wind among winds - all the heavenly host 
called out that the devil had been overthrown; and they rejoiced that by this means no evil would be seen in 
heaven. Thus the ancient enemy fell into the darkness without light and without the joy of life. But he prepared 

his quiver and arrows against the will of the Man of war7 

But the Man prevailed against his enemies through another work on which he had worked, namely through 
humanity whom he created; and in this strength he began to renew the struggle against the arrows and malice 
of the deceitful enemy. 

22. He then took up ‘the Word that became flesh’ as his banner of conflict. This fight will endure until the 
number of the brethren, that is, the blessed, is fulfilled. And again the Man will join in a great battle with the 
enemy, just as he had fought with him before in heaven: but he will destroy him completely, because the enemy 
stood in the idleness of sins and sat in the power of deceit and malice. But whoever has refused to do these 

things is blessed, and his blessed state will never cease. ^ 

23. ‘The Man is of such stature’ that he extends from the beginning of created things until the very end of the 
world. While human beings are able to speak from the time they are made until their demise, they are ignorant 

of what was before and what will be after them. Only God has no beginning and no end.9 

24. ‘From above his shoulders the Man was higher than the clouds in the bright ether.’ This is because only he 
knows, in the mystery of divine glory, what was before the beginning of the world. For God is exalted above all 
and in all things so that neither the angels nor the souls of the just can fathom him completely. From him all 
living beings proceeed, while he himself has no beginning or origin but remains at one in himself. For he lives in 
himself, he has his power in himself, he holds his knowledge in himself. He who lives, empowers and knows is 
God; in these three capacities all God’s works are distinguished and perfected, and in him his works receive 
their potential to fulfillment. 

25. God is eternal, and eternity is fire, and this is where God is. And God is not hidden fire or silent fire, but fire 
in action, for God’s power directs all the thought and understanding of his creatures, in the glory of his 
mysteries and secrets, just as the head directs the body: for he has made rational life so that the eyes can see, 
the ears hear and the nostrils smell, and so that the mouth may utter rational speech. God, therefore, is the head 
of all believers; yet he does not reveal all the things that are concealed in the Godhead, because in him there is 

the mysterious life of the hidden life, just as he maketh his ministers a flaming fire in judgement. 10 For before 
judgement is done it must first be heard. And so it is with God. 

Before the time of the Law - as it were before his shoulders - he tested with water and fire the people who 

lived before the Law, because they could not be tested by any other kind of law. 11 But later, under the Law, he 
purged them with various hard trials; these he himself also fulfilled, when, as a man, he destroyed the devil in 
his power and cleansed humanity from the stains of their sins through true justice. 

26. As the prophet says: ‘the government shall be upon his shoulder’. The meaning of this is as follows. 

Justice in the power of God came about through a human being, when God came forth as a human being; and 

when, as it were on the shoulder of his strength, 12 he destroyed the works of the devil and plundered hell; and 
when he baptized through his apostles and resounded throughout all the earth. God has perfected justice in 
himself for the sake of man, who was made out of earth and fell into mortality; for in the first blossoming of his 
development man was misled by the devil, who opened his own belly and threw forth all the filth within; by this 
means he marks out all the sons of men, who are impregnated with venom in the fire of excess. But God 
assumed flesh in the wholeness of virginal flesh through the heat of the Holy Spirit and without the venomous 

seed of a man. 1 ^ And in this way he became a man and cleansed men of all the devil’s poisonous filth: because 


he was clean without sin, he washed sinners clean of their sins and brought them to salvation. 

27. ‘From below his shoulders down to his thighs he was beneath the clouds in another white cloud.’ The 
meaning is this. From the beginning of all created things up to that true beginning when Truth originated from 
the earth, within the mystery of the divinity, God held fast to many miracles in the white radiance of his glory 
and honour. Of these, some he revealed and some he obscured in cloud. In this way God’s will for the ordinance 
and salvation of holy souls is radiant and white in secret and spiritual life. But it is impossible for all these 
things to be revealed to human knowledge. 

28. Under his shoulders the Man has imposed a kind of service on humanity when he placed them under the old 
laws; for these were like the sound of a word and not the actual word itself. First of all the sound of the word is 
heard, and then afterwards the word itself is understood. Similarly the Old Law was the sound and shadow of 

the word, after which the Word, that is Christ, then appeared. 1 ^ 

29. ‘From his thighs to his knees he was in the earthly air.’ Just as all things pertaining to the flesh come from 
the thighs and are supported and moved by the knees, so also all created things are carried by God and are 
nourished in the heat of fire and moisture of air in which there is the open life of corporeal things. In the same 
way the New Nation comes from chastity to life-giving power in which it is revealed to all, although only in the 
earthly sphere; and it is moderated by the great sweetness of miracles and virtues. For when Divinity joined 
with the Virgin, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit the Word was acknowledged in his humanity, and he 
revealed the New Law through himself. There, in that instant, the sound and the word came together in unity 

when the Old and New Laws met in agreement. 1 ^ 

30. But just as the Old Law was in shadow, while the New can see clearly, so also the souls of the saints cannot 
have their full joy in the period when, as in the Old Law, they are separated from their bodily habitations. They 
cannot see the face of the Father since it is impossible for one half to see fully what is a whole. But when they 
have received their bodily habitations and are whole again, then they will see perfectly what is a whole. From 
that time on they will not be changed; in the same way, the New Law sees what the obscured Old Law could not 

distinguish, and it will never be changed into anything different. 1 ^ 

31. ‘From his knees to the calves of his legs he is in the earth.’ The knees support a person’s weight and the calf 
muscles lend strength to the feet; in the same way God bears all things and fortifies all things; he gives strength 

to the earth so that she can support the other created things, for her strength is their sustenance. The earth is 
as it were the knee and calf muscle for the other elements, and like a cart with its wheel and axle she bears along 
the rest: she guides the water this way and that and causes it to flow, and if it were not for the earth interposed 
between the air and the water, the air would not allow the water free passage. 

But just as the knee may flex and yet be retained by the calf muscles, so also the earth at times may flex 
under the inducement of other created things into situations in which she cannot carry out her functions 
appropriately. But she does not become unstable, because the strength of God restores her once more to her 
rightful condition. 

In the same way the vocation of the New Nation - made manifest through the whole circle of the world by 
the spreading of the gospel, and strengthened by that manifestation - will experience the sweat and perspiration 
of many trials and tribulations when her knees are shaken by the Antichrist. Yet having strength in her calf 
muscles she will not falter, for in her head is all her trust and reliance. But through suffering her head also was 
induced into a different state from the one in which it was first seen by humanity and, like the knees bending, 
the head distanced itself from humanity in order to retain its full strength. So also the Church, now transformed 
into the New Law, will fall back somewhat during the time of the Terrible Destroyer, but she will receive her 

powers once again and endure invincible. 1 ^ 

32. ‘And from his calves to the soles of his feet the Man is in the waters of the abyss in such a way that he also 
stands above the abyss.’ This is because God’s strength and marvellous vitality are hidden things; they stand in 
the waters of the abyss on feet which cannot be seen, as mysteries which humankind can never fathom. And just 
as there are many unknowable things in the upper reaches of the cosmos, so also in the depths of the abyss are 


many powers which lend their strength to the waters, though they can never be known by humankind. For God 
holds all the things under the earth in his control and directs and judges them; and the underworld falls under 
his judgement. There is nothing that is not in his power. 

For this reason everything stands constant in his mysteries, for God has revealed his secrets to no one 
completely. He rests in his mysteries - like the Man standing on his feet - just as he rested on the seventh day 
from his work of creation. 

Likewise during the time of the Antichrist, the vocation of the New Nation will not lose its strength. Rather 
she will conserve her strength until the happy conclusion to the marvellous and (for humanity) unknowable 

workings of God. She will stand firmly on her feet 1 ^ in the power of those marvellous workings, until the last 
day, and she will not falter, for on that day all weakness will come to an end. 

33. And since no one can truly fathom the depths, so also no one can know what will happen to the lost. 
Concerning these things Wisdom says: 

34. ‘Who hath measured the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the abyss?’ 20 The 
meaning of this is as follows. 

The sphere of the world is set in motion by fire, wind and air, and every created thing is held safely within it. 
The heaven with all its adornments is placed at the top of this sphere. (Who is the one who can encompass this 
fully with his sight?) The breadth of the earth is ringed with flowing waters, and everything that flows above the 
abyss is so to speak in the middle of the sphere, though no human being can ever truly comprehend this. The 
abyss - with all its marvels - is so to speak at the bottom of the sphere. No one can understand this completely, 
except God himself, who created it. Humanity lives within this sphere and is encircled by its circumference. For 
this reason, no human being can pass beyond such a limit to the power of his comprehension. Created things 
live within the power of God like the heart within a human being, which is only one small part compared to the 
rest of the body. Living creatures are thus a small part of the greater whole that is the vast and 
incomprehensible power of God. And all creatures in heaven, earth or the abyss can neither comprehend him, 
nor perceive him, nor delimit him. 

All wisdom comes from God the ruler of all. With his wisdom he foresaw all things and composed all things 
in the cosmos, and with that same wisdom he distinguished every creature from the next. It was Wisdom who 
knew and tasted heavenly things and travelled round the circle of the heavens in her regal ministry. She crossed 
the earth in the service of her duties, fixing the functions of every creaturely existence, and she penetrated the 

abyss. 21 She is like the good administrator who allows nothing to perish that has been assigned to her. But 
Wisdom is also the eye of God, through whom he foresees and oversees all things. She stands before him as his 
fondest friend in loving embrace, considering and reckoning all things with him. Through Wisdom also, human 
beings are named the heights of the heavens, because they surpass and dominate all other creatures through 
knowledge, the eye of Wisdom. But they also resemble the breadth of the earth, since they have the power of 
desire and yearning. Now how is this possible? 

What someone desires will also delight them, and so they demand that for which they feel desire, and then it 
is granted to them according to what their will is. If they pray to God for something he will help them, but if 
they turn to the devil, he too will run to them with evil promptings. People also have desires and yearnings 
according to their reason and appetite. However, when they gain what they desire or yearn for, this comes about 
not through their own ability but through the permission of God, for it is he who created them. And since 
human beings can do many things, they also have desire and yearning, through which they can demand many 
things. Because the devil deceived the first man, so he also leads him astray by many promptings. 

Human beings resemble the depths of the abyss when they turn from the desire for good and call upon the 
devil. According to their will then the devil supports their desires, and God allows this to happen. And when 
someone has good desires and does good things, but at some stage nevertheless fails - not through giving up 
good things completely, but through neglect - then God will not allow that person to perish, since he or she still 
had the desire for good within them. But the devil does not trust such a person to follow completely the desires 
of the flesh, since he recognizes in that person that God will not give them up. So this person is not like the 
depths of the abyss but more like the weather which at one moment is bright sunshine and at the next moment 
changes into a black cloud. What a disgrace when a human being, who has been created above all divine works, 


abandons God to imitate the devil, that creature who lost his glory and in his pride opposed himself to God and 
perished! Who has ever measured such disgrace? Who can ever measure the loss when a human being 
abandons God and so to speak chooses for his or her false god the worst tyrant ever, namely the devil? God 
foresees such things and brings them to judgement. 

35. ‘The Man had turned towards the East, so that he looked both East and South.’ The meaning is this: in the 
beginning of the world God commanded his creatures to go forth like the shining sun; and he not only brought 
his creatures forth but also multiplied them to perfection, like the sun shining high in the South. Though the 
human race had a good beginning, they fell away into evil; nevertheless God has not only restored us to our 
original state but also endowed us with even greater virtues of sanctity. 

36. N0W his face shone with such splendour that you could not perfectly see it.’ This is because the holy Deity is 
burning so bright in all goodness and justice that no one has the power to contemplate it. For there is no God 
beyond God, and no one is like him in his works, because in all his marvellous actions he alone is God. His 
works are unfathomable, as is God himself. He is the energy by which the life of angels is fired, and out of that 
splendour come many mysteries; these in themselves make up the wondrous life of marvels, which is in God. 
Such marvels are beyond any number: in the heavens, the earth, or the abyss. 

37. ‘The radiant cloud was at his mouth in the likeness of a trumpet.’ The meaning is this: the delightful divine 
order comprehends all things proceeding from God. It joins with the divine will like the sound proceeding from 
a trumpet ‘full of the rapid soundings of all musical sounds’. For all things rational and irrational immediately 
obey the divine order in the fullness of their subjection. And they do this for his honour and praise, since God 
created them. God is good, and all things that proceed from him are good. 

38. ‘And when the Man blew a breath, it sent out three winds.’ The meaning is this: passing by hidden inquiry 
through the profound order of his will, God allowed three paths of justice to appear, according to three 
hierarchies of blessed creatures: ‘One wind bears a cloud of fire, one a cloud of storms, and one a cloud of light; 
and each cloud is supported by its wind.’ The first - the path of justice - carries like a cloud of fire the glory of 
the angels, who burn in the love of God and desire only what God wills. The second path bears like a cloud of 
storms the works of men, turbulent and variable in their many anxieties and tribulations. The third path bears 
like a cloud of light the pure white virginity of the incarnation of the Lord. Justice is the foundation of these 
winds and sustains them in a state of beatitude. 

For God, who ordained all things in the hiddenness of his will and allowed them to come forth, established 
first the spirits of the heavenly citizens in righteousness. He then sustained human beings in the turbulence of 
their behaviour so that they would not perish completely. Finally, through his pure incarnation and through the 
light of virginity he put to flight the works of darkness, and he showed which works are just. The angels 
remained in the love of God, but human beings - falling away from God - were restored through holy works to 
their former glory, for works perfected in sanctity have made us holy. At present the saints still labour in the 
work of the flesh, but after the Last Day they will rejoice in symphony and praise. For now the flesh constrains 
the spirit within the flesh, but then the spirit will subjugate the flesh; and in this way humanity will achieve full 
sanctity. 

39. ‘But the wind bearing the cloud of fire remains before the Man’s face.’ The meaning is this: justice holds in 
the heights the glory of the angels burning in the love of God, and justice endures in the will and glory of God. 
And since the angels continuously contemplate his face they are prompted always to do his will, and they never 
depart from him. 

40. The other two winds descend with their clouds to his chest, and there they expand their breath outwards.’ 
The reason is that justice accompanies humanity on two paths, that is to say, the path of the Old Law and the 
path of the Incarnation of the Son of God. With the good works of humanity, justice descends into the deep 
knowledge of God, where it expands outwards in many marvellous works. And God knows the works of the 
saints and does not bring them into forgetfulness, for in his hidden counsel he prepares an eternal reward for 
them, and he expands them outwards in infinite praise to his glory. 

‘But the wind that stays before the Man’s face extends its cloud from the East to the South.’ Shining in the 
presence of God with the glory of the higher spirits who have persisted in truth since the beginning of creation, 



justice strives towards the good works of men and women, so that they too may touch these heavenly joys and 
as it were come back to their good beginning. God has allied human beings and angels in one rationality, and he 
has provided guardian angels to protect men and women. He did this both in the Old and the New Testaments, 
but he associated them together with greater love in the New rather than the Old Testament. For in the Old 
Testament the angels were like a voice speaking to humanity, but in the New Testament angels and humans are 
inseparable, just as voice and word are now joined together. 

41. ‘In the cloud of fire are myriads of fiery beings; and they are all one life in one will and one conjunction.’ 

This signifies a host of blessed spirits alive in a fire of glory and honour. Their glory is inexpressible and their 
number is uncountable, so that no one may know how many they are, except the Knowledge of God. What God 
wills they also will, and they are joined together as one, like a body which cannot be divided. Although they have 
individual faces, nevertheless they are one in their conjunction, just as a body has limbs yet remains one body. 
In this way they are one single unanimous life. 

42. ‘And in their presence a writing tablet is laid out, filled with feathers; the tablet soars in the precepts of God 
when the precepts bear it aloft.’ The explanation is that before them is the mystery, full of divine judgements, 
and this is revealed according to the will of God, whenever the will of God wishes to reveal it. 

‘And the knowledge of God had inscribed hidden mysteries upon it, on which the myriads of beings gazed 
with unified zeal.’ This means that God in his hidden purpose has other hidden purposes for which the blessed 
spirits wait in intense expectation. Moreover, when God sees some people bowing down to idols and others not 
keeping his commands, then, through the fiery judgements of the heavenly citizens who blaze in his love, he 
awakens the wings of the wind: he sends thunder and lightning onto the earth; he brings fear to the nations 
through famine, plague and plundering armies; and thus he brings fearful disasters upon all the earth. 

43. And when the angels ‘have studied what is written, the divine virtue comes upon them and like a single 
mighty trumpet they sound forth in harmony with all varieties of music.’ This means that when they gaze upon 
the will of God, they also receive the power of God so that in one mind they send forth praises to God in the 
strength and fullness of all joys. In responding to all the purposes of God they speak nothing else but praise, 
since all his judgements are true and just. 

44. This is what John heard in his Apocalypse, and it is written: ‘Lord God Almighty, your ways are true and 
just.’ 22 The meaning of which is as follows. 

O Lord, through fear you are called Lord, and through love you are God, and through your governance of all 
you are Almighty. Your ways are true and just: for true Fear dispels all other fears, and true Love allies us with 
all other loves, and true Power holds other powers in check. For when human beings, in their presumption, 
make their own laws, as if they themselves were God, then through your just judgements you show yourself to 
them and teach them that none has the power to withstand you. When also they place the love of the flesh 
higher than their just love for you, then you trample that love in the bitterness of pain. And they find no 
consolation save in you. 

But when they come so far, through not keeping your commands, that they bow down to images instead of 
your name, then you wage war in just judgement against your enemy who, from that first deception, has 
persuaded the human race to hold you in disdain. And then you send down thunder and lightning upon the 
earth. You pour forth the floods from the waters. You order the land to be unfruitful. You bring forth pestilence 
and wars among them. You teach them to know and acknowledge that all this occurs through none but you; that 
all your judgements are just and true. 

45. The hosts of angels praise the good works of humanity and, because of those works, not for one hour nor for 
one moment do they cease from their praise; it sounds forth unceasing and never-ending. Now God wants the 
praise of the angels so that their glory will increase. To him this is pleasing. And in their praise he wants the 
angels to make clear and manifest the works of the saints, for the human race is made in the image and likeness 
of God, and so he wants the angels to praise the works of men and women in his presence. But because the 
human race is supported by the help of God alone, in the same way also God wishes to be praised by humans 
and angels together so that their glory may be magnified. 


46. And so God has fittingly created all things. But, it is said, the mysteries of God, which shine in his sight, are 
incomprehensible to human knowledge; they are in angels, spirits, ministers, in those who call out and those 
who rejoice in their joy; and these mysteries are unknowable to human knowledge as to who, what, and of what 
quality they are. And although the human race is like a mountain in its knowledge, since it rises up after God in 
its knowledge and reaches to the heights, yet no one ever sees the summit of the mountain or even the higher 

part of the mountain, which is the knowledge of God. 2 3 And no one ever ascends that far, nor can they know the 
mysteries of God or the mysteries of those beings who are always present in the sight of God. 

Some of those beings who are always in the sight of God have been named by the prophets and by other 
saints who have seen visions through the Holy Spirit. But others, who spoke a little about them when they were 
touched by divine inspiration, have not been named. 

47. As is written by the Apostle Paul: ‘He heard hidden words, which it is not permitted for anyone to speak.’ 2 4 
The meaning of this is as follows. This man’s heart needed to be strengthened by the inflowing of many great 
miracles so that he could lavish on other people the strengthening power of the virtues. He therefore perceived 
hidden words, words with foreknowledge, words hidden from men and women who do not know through whom 
or by whom or how these words were uttered; or what kind of words they were or what mode they had. Just as 
no one can see the Divinity, so also it is not permitted for any human being to say how these words are brought 
forth by the utterance of the voice or by the praiseful expression of God’s mysteries. For the words are concealed 
completely in the mysteries of the spirit, and humanity in the flesh is alien to them. 


29. The Unknown Language 


The Unknown Language ( Latin Lingua ignota) presents something of a puzzle. It was compiled in the middle 
period 0/1151-8, before work began on The Book of Life’s Merits. As in many medieval glossaries, the words 
are classified rather like a thesaurus, and arranged in a hierarchical list beginning with expressions for God, 
angel and human being, and finishing with the names of trees, plants, herbs and animals. For an impression of 

the style of the language, the following examples are of interest: 1 


ENGLISH 

LATIN 

LINGUA IGNOTA 

God 

Deus 

Aiguonz 

angel 

angelus 

aieganz 

saint 

sanctus 

ziuienz 

Saviour 

Salvator 

Liuionz 

devil 

diabolus 

diuueliz 

spirit 

spiritus 

ispariz 

human 

homo 

inimoiz 


In this small sample, a few patterns of word formation 2 emerge which would repay further study. As to the 
question of how the ‘unknown language’ was used, a satisfactory answer has not yet been offered. It has been 
suggested that it was a secret language for communication between the nuns at the Rupertsberg. Alternatively, 

as a passage in The Book of Life’s Merits indicates, 3 it may have been purely a sacred language, and this 
conjecture is supported by a text in which words from the language occur. In a song on the dedication of a 
church, Hildegard replaces standard Latin words with her own expressions from the lingua ignota. Although 
the theme and inspiration for the piece is the well-known vision of Revelation 21:2, And I John saw the holy 
city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband’, the 
result has an additional sense of mystery appropriate to a vision of heaven. 

The original text of the song is as follows, with non-Latin words in italics, and a modern English 
translationA 

O orzchis Ecclesia 

armis divinis praecincta 

et hyazintho ornata, 

tu es caldemia stigmatum loifolum 

et urbs scientiarum. 

O, o, tu es etiam crizanta 
in alto sono et es chorzta gemma. 

[Church immeasurable, 

protected by divine armour, 

and decorated with hyacinth, 

you are the perfume of the wounds of the peoples 

and the city of all kinds of knowledge. 

Oh you are also adorned 


in deep music, a gleaming gemstone.] 



30. Allegorical Letters 


The six letters selected here illustrate varying aspects of Hildegard’s allegorical method. The first and possibly 
the earliest of the six, an admonitory letter to the imperial supporter Hermann of Constance, uses the imagery 
of pruning garden plants to remind the bishop of his duties, while the second letter, to a provost at Averbode, 
develops a more traditional image of the pastor as shepherd of his sheep. In both cases Hildegard’s message 
comes from the ‘living light’ or ‘secret light’ of her visionary experience. The third letter, to an abbess, is a 
response to a more personal query, but nevertheless turns the ‘lion’ of a biblical verse into a challenging 
allegorical figure. In her message to the papal supporter Eberh ard of Salzburg Hildegard sends her advice, 
encouraging the bishop (like Gregory the Great before her) to divide his time equally between spiritual 
reflection and pastoral action. As in the letters to Abbot Adam and PiiorDimo that follow, Hildegard develops 
personified allegoi'ical figures, the maidens Love, Humility and Obedience; these are virtues and powers who 
stand at the threshold of the human mind, waiting for an invitation to lend their strength and assistance. 



Hildegardto Hermann, bishop of Constance, 1148-66 [Letter 36] 


The living light that reveals miracles speaks. In your official position you are a father and a pastor for the 
guidance of souls; stretch out your hands to prevent a hostile man from sowing your field with tares! Watch 
over your garden, therefore, which the divine gift has planted, and take care that its aromatic plants do not dry 
up. Cut away the rotten parts and discard them, for they are suffocating the usefulness of your plants. In this 
way allow your plants to prosper. For when the sun hides its rays, the world too withdraws its joy. 

And I say: do not darken your garden with the tedium of silence, but prune in the true light what needs to be 
pruned. Light up your temple with good will; kindle a flame in your censer and throw in the myrrh, so that the 
smoke will rise up to the palace of the living God. And you will live forever. 



Hildegard to Provost Andrew at Averbode, before 1166 [Letter 54] 


The secret light says: You are frightened of the wind; you are falling asleep in the green tree of your mind. But 
the man who has the green force of vitality in his inner heart builds on the height of the wall of the house. A 
good shepherd feeds his sheep, but if he does not have the inner strength to help them when danger comes, and 
if he runs away in his weariness, then he is of no benefit to the office of pastoral care. He might as well be a 
sheep himself rather than a shepherd! 

Human being! You are struggling in the waves, hardly able to save yourself from sinking. Though you see 
prudence everywhere, you are lacking in strength. But you are not lacking in will, and so the grace of God will 
shine forth within you. 



Hildegard to the Abbess of Altena, before 1173 [Letter 49R] 

You who are an abbess and teacher 2 in the brightness of the leaping fountain, the representative of Christ, 

listen: ‘Behold, the lion of the house of Judah, the root of David, hath prevailed.’^ The meaning is this: the son, 
splendour of the holy Godhead, is like a root. He also roars like a lion when he casts the first angel with his 

followers into the abyss.4 With rending teeth he drives all injustice from him. 5 In this way, then, he is the root 
of fortitude. And he draws to himself all those who confess him with good works. In this way he prevails over all 
things like a lion. Listen now to my admonition to you. 


Hildegard to Eberhard, Archbishop of Salzburg, 1163-4 [Letter 25R] 

In your office as representative of the Son of the living God, I see your present status as being like two walls 
joined by a cornerstone. One of these walls appears like a bright white cloud. The other is partly in shadow. The 
two are so placed that the brightness of the one wall cannot mingle with the darkness of the other wall, nor can 
the darkness affect the brightness. 

The two walls are your labours, joined together by your soul. On the one side, in the brightness, your sighs 
and efforts pant towards God along the narrow way. On the other side, somewhat in the shadows, your labours 
are directed to the people under your authority. The fact is that you regard the brightness of your efforts as 
something personal to you. The shadows of your labours, on the other hand, you regard as something foreign to 
you. You do not allow yourself to mix the two activities and so you frequently feel a tiredness in your soul. And 
you do not realize that your efforts towards God and your labours in the world are equally valid. 

In fact, when you pant with great effort for heavenly things and when you exercise God’s pastoral care for the 
people, the two can be connected in the one reward. Just as Christ adhered to heavenly things and nevertheless 

turned his attention to the people. As it is written: ‘You are gods and all of you sons of the most High. ’7 In other 
words, you are ‘gods’ in heavenly matters and ‘sons of the most High’ in the pastoral care of the people. 

Therefore, father, let the fountain of Wisdom flow through your labours, the fountain from which Love and 
Obedience drew their water, the two daughters who were dressed in the garments of the King. For Wisdom 
ordained all things with Love, drawing forth many smaller streams, as she says: ‘I alone have compassed the 

circuit of the heaven. Through Obedience, humanity has received a command from God. On the one hand 
there is the garment of Love, who looks upon the face of God only in the angelic orders. On the other hand, 
there is the garment of Obedience in which the Lord was clothed in his humanity. 

These two maidens are knocking at your door, and Love says to you: I want to live with you. I want you to 
bring me to your bed and keep me in zealous love. For when you touch and wash wounds with compassion, I lie 
in your bed, and when you treat simple and clean-living people with benevolence in God, then I am your zealous 
lover. 

But Obedience also speaks to you: I will live with you, because you keep the laws and commandments of God. 
Therefore hold me tight with all your strength, not as an estate overseer but as your dear loved one. For you 
indeed received me when you were baptized, and you held me when you made progress in the discipline of 

obedience and in high office when you obeyed God’s commandments. For Love is my matter, 9 and I was born 
from her. 

Again, O father, Wisdom speaks to you: Be like the father of a household, who gently listens to the 
foolishness of his sons but does not abandon his prudence: In the same way, I unite heavenly things and earthly 
things for the use and benefit of the people. Therefore touch and wash their wounds, hold the simple and clean- 
living people, and with God’s help have joy in both sides of your life. 

Now, O father, I - a poor woman - see that your will is opting for the doorway of the virtues, who will come 

to you so that with the end of your body you will be complete. May he who is 10 and surveys all things keep your 
body and soul in his salvation. 


Hildegard to Abbot Adam of Ebrach, before 1166 [Letter 85R/A] 

In a true vision of the spirit in a waking state, I saw the likeness of a beautiful girl shining with a splendour so 
bright that I could not look upon her properly. She had a cloak whiter than snow and brighter than a star. She 

wore shoes as of purest gold. And she had in her right hand the sun and the moon, 12 gently embracing them. On 
her breast was an ivory tablet in which there appeared the image of a human being coloured sapphire blue. And 
the whole of creation acknowledged the beautiful girl as their sovereign Lady. And she said to the image on her 
breast: ‘With thee is the principality in the day of thy strength, in the brightness of the saints: from the womb 

before the daystar I begot thee.’ 1 ^ 

And I heard a voice saying these things to me. The girl you see is Love, 1 4 who has her dwelling in eternity. 

For when God wanted to create the world, he inclined himself in the sweetest affection, and foresaw all things 
necessary, just as a father provides an inheritance for his son; and in this way he ordered all his works in a great 
burning fire of love. Then every creature in every species and form acknowledged its Creator; for in the 

beginning Love was the base matter 1 ^ from which all creatures came. And God said ‘Let it be done’, 1 ^ and it was 
done, for every creature was made through Love in the twinkling of an eye. 

‘The likeness of a beautiful girl is shining with a splendour so bright that you cannot not look upon her 
properly.’ This is because she reveals the fear of the Lord in such pure knowledge that mortal humanity cannot 
fathom it completely. And she has ‘a cloak whiter than snow and brighter than a star’, because, in her pure white 
innocence without guile, she cloaks all things with the most splendid works of the saints. 

‘She wears shoes as of purest gold’, because she has paths in the best part of God’s election. 

‘She had in her right hand the sun and the moon, gently embracing them’, because the right hand of God 
embraces all creatures and extends further to nations, kingdoms, and all good things. Therefore it is written, 

‘The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou at my right hand.’ 1 ? 

‘On her breast is an ivory tablet’, because in the knowledge of God, the earth of wholeness flourished in the 
Virgin Mary. And in it ‘there appeared an image of a human being coloured sapphire blue’, because the Son of 

God shone forth in charity from the ancient of days. 1 ^ 

‘And the whole of creation acknowledged the beautiful girl as their sovereign Lady.’ It all comes from her 
because she was the First One creating all things, just as the image on her breast shows that God clothed 
himself in humanity for the sake of humanity. For when all creation was fulfilled by the command of God - just 

as he said ‘Increase and multiply and fill the earth’ 1 ^ - then the heat of the true sun descended like dew into the 
Maiden’s womb, and from her flesh he made humankind just as he formed Adam in flesh and blood from the 
clay of the earth. And the Maiden gave birth to him in her wholeness. 

But it was good that Love should have wings. For when the man Adam first walked the earth, he experienced 
a pressure to fly, but instead he fell, and it was only the wings of Love that raised him up. This was through holy 
humility. For when the bad senses brought Adam down, divinity kept close watch so that he did not perish 
completely in the fall, and so that divinity might redeem him in the holiness of humanity. And these were wings 
of great power, for humility raised up the man who was lost. And this humility was the humanity of our saviour, 

for Love created man, but Humility redeemed him. 20 

In all truth, the eye of love is hope, but its heart is heavenly love, 21 and the two are joined together by 
abstinence. The eye of humility, on the other hand, is faith; its heart is obedience and the two are connected by 
renunciation of the world. 

Love was in eternity; and at the beginning of all holiness she brought forth all created things without any 
contact with evil. But she created Adam and Eve from the natural purity of the earth. And just as the two of 
them were ancestors of all the children of men, so the two virtues of Love and Humility gave birth to all the 
other virtues. 

Human being to whom I am speaking! These Virtues are knocking at your door now and saying, ‘O tabernacle 
of the man who remains with us in the morning, you are worn out already!’ And Love says to you, ‘O faithful 
friend, we do not wish you to retire from the bonds of your office. When God in the circle of heaven wished to 
send forth all his creatures, we embraced all his works and laboured with him! But humanity fell; we wept with 


them but did not abandon them, even though they rejected us.’ 

And Humility speaks to you especially, ‘What troubles human beings suffered though I held them up! But 
you say that you want to escape. Nevertheless, you have a load to carry to the vineyard. Yet you stand still and 
refuse to walk in your sluggishness, looking for another way to go!’ 

We know that our comrade will not act like this. If the people love you, work with them! 

‘And when the wind roars with the rumours of war and the instability of all human endeavours and activities, 
then look to me, and I will aid you with the circle of power contained in my wings.’ 

Samson lost his great strength through the foolishness of a woman. Take care that this does not happen to 
you if you respond in your exhausted state. Solomon too lost his great glory through the foolishness of women. 
Watch out carefully so that the green fruitfulness which you have from God does not dry up through the 
carelessness of your thoughts! Look to the ornaments of gold and precious stones that Love and Humility have 
laid up within you. Give glory to God also for the arm -bands which Wisdom has given you. The people run to 
you to receive them. Work with the people, and you will remain with the sun! 



Hildegardto Prior Dimo, 1169-70 [Letter 58] 


In a true vision I saw and heard these words. Life sees and overcomes death, as the small boy David defeated the 
giant Goliath. I see a mountain rising up on high. A valley lies below; at times it allows flowers to blossom in 
their green force of vitality, but it also brings forth useless grasses, thorns and briars. 

Now, human being! Understand the meaning! Two men were sitting in a house; one was a knight, the other a 
slave. And two beautiful wise maidens came to the house and knocked on the door, saying, ‘We have heard of 
your reputation in distant lands, and it was a poor reputation, for you have spoken badly of the king. And the 
king has said of you: “Who do these ruffians think they are? And who do they think I am?” Hear now our 
counsel for your victory.’ 

‘I am Humility. I have seen the life of God’s son in the Incarnation, and I have trodden down death. The 
mountain is the works of obedience, and the valley of the flowers is benevolence, which the storms of the vices 
often frequent as thorns and briars.’ 

Human being! The knight, that is Obedience, and the slave, that is Pride, are sitting in the house of your 

heart. Love and Humility 22 are knocking at the door of your mind, so that you do not commit all the wrong that 
you are harbouring within you. You should know that the slave is overcome by the knight. And so the beauty of 
Obedience will never fall beneath his feet. 

But Pride says: ‘It is impossible to break the chains with which I bind human beings!’ 

To which you should respond by listening to the words of Love, who says: ‘I sat untouched in heaven and I 
kissed the earth. Pride swore against me and wanted to soar beyond the stars, but I threw him into the abyss. 
Trample down now the slave of pride and stand fast within me! I am Love, O my son; embrace Humility as your 

Lady. And in so doing you will never be troubled or confounded! ’ 2 3 


31. A Vision of Love (from The Book of Divine Works I, i) 


This excerpt from The Book of Divine Works, written in the period 1163-73/4, sees Hildegard’s visionary gifts at 
their height. Beginning with a vision reminiscent of the prophet Ezekiel, Hildegard moves to a paean of divine 
immanence as embodied in a figure who is at once Love, Wisdom and Power. Its nearest equivalents are the 
sapiential ti'adition of the Old Testament Apocrypha, notably Wisdom of Solomon 7-8, and its theme is 
summed up in Ecclesiasticus 24:1, which states that ‘Wisdom shall praise herself, and shall glory in the midst 
of her people’. 



From The Book of Divine Works I, l 


1. And I saw as amid the airs of the South in the mystery of God a beautiful and marvellous image of a human 
figure; her face was of such beauty and brightness that I could more easily have stared at the sun. On her head 
she had a broad band of gold. And in that golden band above her head there appeared a second face, like an old 
man, whose chin and beard touched the top of the first head. Wings protruded from behind the neck of the 
figure on either side, and rising up clear of the golden band their tips met and joined overhead. On the right, 
above the sweep of the wing, was an image of an eagle’s head, and I saw it had eyes of fire in which there 
appeared the brilliance of angels as in a mirror. On the left, above the sweep of the wing, was the image of a 
human face, which shone like the brightness of the stars. These faces were turned towards the East. 

But from each of her shoulders, a wing extended down to the knee. And she wore a tunic like the glory of the 
sun and in her hands she carried a lamb like the bright light of day. But beneath her feet she trampled a monster 
of dreadful appearance, black and venomous, and also a serpent, which had fixed its teeth into the right ear of 
the monster and wound the rest of its body across its own head, and had stretched its tail on the left side. 

2. The figure spoke: I am the supreme fire and energy. I have kindled all the sparks of the living, and I have 
breathed out no mortal things, for I judge them as they are. I have properly ordained the cosmos, flying about 
the circling circle with my upper wings, that is with wisdom. I am the fiery life of divine substance, I blaze above 
the beauty of the fields, I shine in the waters, I burn in sun, moon, and stars. And I awaken all to life with every 
wind of the air, as with invisible life that sustains everything. For the air lives in greenness and fecundity. The 
waters flow as though they are alive. The sun also lives in its own light, and when the moon has waned it is 
rekindled by the light of the sun and thus lives again; and the stars shine out in their own light as though they 
are alive. 

I established the pillars that support the whole circle of the earth. I made the winds, and, subject to them, the 
wings of the winds, which are lesser winds. Through their gentle force, these contain the stronger winds and 
prevent them from showing their full strength with great danger; in the same way the body covers the soul and 
contains it lest it breathe out and expire. And conversely also, just as the breath of the soul strengthens and 
sustains the body so that it does not weaken, in the same way the stronger winds energize the subsidiary winds 
to carry out their appropriate tasks. 

Thus I am concealed in things as fiery energy. They are ablaze through me, like the breath that ceaselessly 
enlivens the human being, or like the wind-tossed flame in a fire. All these things live in their essence, and there 
is no death in them, for I am life. I also am rationality, who holds the breath of the resonant word by which the 
whole of creation was created; and I have breathed life into everything, so that nothing by its nature may be 
mortal, for I am life. 

And I am life: not the life struck from stone, or blossoming from branches, or rooted in a man’s fertility, but 
life in its fullness, for all living things have their roots in me. Reason is the root, through which the resonant 
word flourishes. 

Therefore as God is rational, how could it be that he did not act, since he allows all of his works to flourish 
through the human being whom he created in his own image and likeness and in whom he marked out all 
creatures according to their measure? But it was in eternity that God wished to create his great work - the 
human being - and when he had completed that work he entrusted human beings with all creation so that they 
could create with it in the same way that God created his work, that is, humanity. 

So I am the helper, for all living things burn through me; and I am steady life in eternity, without beginning 
or end, the same life which is God in motion and activity; and yet this one life has three powers: eternity is the 
Father, the word the Son, and the breath connecting the two the Holy Spirit, and similarly God signified the 
same in human beings in whom there is body, soul and rationality. 

The fact that I ‘blaze above the beauty of the fields’ means this: the earth is the matter from which God 
makes man and woman. The fact that ‘I shine in the waters’ signifies the soul, for - just as water flows through 
all the earth - the soul permeates all of the body. ‘I burn in sun and moon’; this refers to rationality, and the 
‘stars’ are the innumerable words of rationality. ‘And I awaken all to life with every wind of the air, as with 
invisible life that sustains everything.’ This signifies that whatever grows and matures is animated and 
preserved through air and wind, and it deviates in no way from the power within. 



3. And again I heard a voice from heaven, which spoke to me: 

God, who created all, made humanity in his own image and likeness, and in them he marked out both the 
higher and lower creatures. He had such love for humanity that he destined them to take the place from which 
the falling angel had been ejected, and he ordained them for the glory and honour which the angel in his bliss 
had lost. This is shown by the vision you see. For when you see ‘as amid the airs of the South in the mystery of 
God a beautiful and marvellous image of a human figure’, this signifies the Love of the heavenly Father in the 
strength of his unceasing divinity, beautiful in its selectivity, and marvellous in its gifts of mysteries, appearing 
in the human figure because, when the son of God assumed human flesh, he redeemed lost humanity through 
the service of Love. This is why the face was ‘of such beauty and brightness’ that you ‘could more easily have 
stared at the sun’, because the abundance of Love emanates in such brightness of gifts that it far surpasses all 
exercise of human understanding (by which it can discern diverse ideas in the soul) - so far, in fact, that no 
person can grasp such abundance with their senses. This signifies symbolically that things may be perceived 
through faith that cannot be seen visibly with the eyes. 

4. ‘On her head the human figure had a broad band of gold’, because only universal faith, diffused round the 
whole ambit of the earth and originating in the bright splendour of the first dawn, can encompass in all devotion 
the great abundance of true Love, namely that God in the humanity of his son redeemed human beings and 
confirmed them with the downpouring of the Holy Spirit, so that one God is acknowledged in the Trinity who 
without temporal beginning before eternity was God in the Godhead. 

‘And in that golden band above her head there appeared a second face, like an old man’; this signifies the all- 
surpassing goodness of the deity, without beginning or end, who succours the faithful, because his ‘chin and 
beard touched the top of the first head’, and so by his disposition and protection of all, God touches the height of 
utmost Charity, in which the Son through his humanity leads lost men and women back to the heavens. 

5. ‘Wings protruded from behind the neck of the figure on either side, and rising up clear of the golden band 
their tips met and joined overhead.’ This means that the love of God cannot be separated from the love of 
neighbour, since they proceed from the virtue of Charity in the unity of faith, and through great longing they 
encompass that faith. And the holy Godhead covers the immeasurable splendour of his glory from human 
beings for as long as they remain in the shadow of death, deprived of the heavenly tunic which they lost with 
Adam. 

6. ‘On the right, above the sweep of the wing, was an image of an eagle’s head’, and you saw it had ‘eyes of fire in 
which there appeared the brilliance of angels as in a mirror’. At the heights of triumphant subjection, then, 
when a person submits to God and conquers the devil, she is carried aloft in the joy of divine protection. And, 
fired by the Holy Spirit, when she raises up her mind and fixes her gaze upon God, then the blessed spirits 
appear in her in plain sight and offer to God the devotion of her heart. The eagle thus symbolizes the spiritual 
men and women who in full devotion of mind and in contemplation frequently gaze upon God like the angels. 
Therefore the blessed spirits, who ceaselessly contemplate God, rejoice in the good works of just people, and 
they show these works to God with their own natures, and so they continue their praise of God and never come 
to an end, for they will never exhaust his fullness. Could anyone ever count all the innumerable wonders which 
God brings about through his power and might? Indeed for the angels there is a brightness as of many mirrors, 
and through this brightness they see, but no one is as active or as powerful as God, since no one is like him, and 
he is not subject to time. 

7. Before the beginning of time, God held in his foreknowledge everything that he has since made. Outside of 
any moment or passing of time before eternity, all things visible and invisible appeared in the pure and sacred 
godhead, as trees and other created things when close to water are reflected in it; and though they are not 
actually in the water physically, nevertheless an accurate shape appears there. When God said ‘Fiat, let there 

be...’, 1 at once all those things that did not have bodies assumed a physical shape - all those things which he 
had seen in his foreknowledge before the beginning of time. Just as in a mirror all things are reflected that stand 
before it, so all his created works appeared in holy divinity outside the passage of time. And how could God be 
empty of the foreknowledge of his works, since each of his creatures - once it has assumed physical form - is 
whole and perfect in its designated function; for the holy Divinity knew in advance how he would be present as 
thought, knowledge and function. A beam of light reveals the form of a created thing through its shadow, and 


likewise God’s pure foreknowledge perceives the form of every creature before it is embodied. Each thing that 
God intended to create in his foreknowledge, before it was bodied forth, shone out according to his likeness; and 
in the same way a man or woman will catch sight of the sun’s splendour before they actually see its substance. 
And just as the splendour of the sun indicates the sun itself, so also the praise of the angels reveals God, for it 
cannot ever be that the sun is without its light, and in the same way neither can the deity be without the praise 
of the angels. So the foreknowledge of God came first, and his work of creation followed; and if his 
foreknowledge had not preceded, then his work would not have appeared, for you can tell nothing by looking at 
a person’s body until you see their face: but when you see the person’s face, then you can praise their body. In 
this way a human being contains within him or her both the foreknowledge of God and the activity of God. 



HILDEGARD’S LIFE AND INFLUENCE 


32. Queries and Requests: Selected Letters to Hildegard 


In the twelfth century, writing a letter was rather like composing a speech. The main intended effect was aural, 
and the purpose was to convey the spoken word by another medium, so that the recipients of the letter could 
hear ‘the voice of the absent person’ who had composed it. When it was received, the letter was read out loud, 
so that all present, whether literate or not, could participate in its message. 

The communal nature of the letter meant that its style was oral and rhetorical, with a conventional 
structure of salutation, exordium, narration, petition and conclusion. Hildegar’s first letter, for instance, the 
appeal to Bernard of Clairvaux (which has already been considered for its content in the Introduction) , could 
be analysed structurally along these lines, and more examples of conventionally structured letters are found 
below. At least in theory, the opening of the letter, the salutation, had to obey a rule whereby the names of 
sender and recipient were placed in order of seniority. The exordium that followed then set the tone for the 
letter, with a suitable biblical quotation or moral to capture the attention of the recipient(s). 

If the sender was an important writer, then the letter would be valued very highly both in itself, as a token of 
the friendship of the sender, and also for its message and content. This phenomenon is partly to be explained by 
the long and expensive process involved in sending a letter. The message was first dictated to a scribe, who 
would take notes on his wax tablet, translate the letter if necessary, and then transcribe it onto parchment. It 
would then be delivered: important bishops and abbots had their own messengers, but otherwise the letter 
would have to await the arrival of a carrier already travelling in the same direction. Naturally this led to delays in 
the receipt of letters, and a corresponding value was attached to them when they finally arrived. Sometimes 
private messages were also conveyed by the bearer of the letter to ensure that they did not reach the wrong ears. 
Often when a letter was composed for posterity, a copy was retained before the original was sent, and an 
important author would have his or her letters gathered, edited and in some cases rewritten for the final 
collection. 

As far as Hildegard’s correspondents are concerned, most are important people of her day, perhaps not 
surprising when we recall that she was a member of an established noble family from Bermersheim. She was 
frequently approached with specific requests, for instance for texts of sermons she had preached, or for advice 
on particular matters. Though the subject-matter of letters to Hildegard is usually spiritual, it also concerns 
political matters, whether of Church or state; in the present selection there are allusions to the Second Crusade, 
the Synod of Trier, the Council ofRheims, and the schism between pope and emperor, as well as to abuses and 
corruption within the Church itself. Two of her correspondents here - Bishop Henry of Liege, and Archbishop 
Eberhard of Salzburg - were to a greater or lesser extent supporters of the Emperor Barbarossa, and both are 
named witnesses to the imperial deed of protection which Barbarossa issued to the Rupertsberg in 1163 during 

the wars and disturbances of the schism. Other correspondents 1 include an abbess without an abbey (Gertrud), 
and a Paris academic. 


Abbot Bernard of Clairvaux to Hildegard, 1146-7 [Letter 1R] 2 

To his beloved daughter in Christ, Hildegard, from Father Bernard, called the Abbot of Clairvaux. If the prayer of 
a sinner can be of some effect. 

You seem to hold our meagre status in greater esteem than our own conscience allows, but we attribute this 
to your humility. Nevertheless I have by no means neglected to reply to your charitable letter, although the 
numerous duties of this office compel me to keep my reply shorter than I would wish. 

We wish you joy in the grace of God that is within you, and for our part we beseech you to acknowledge it as 
grace and to respond with all the affection of humility and devotion, knowing that ‘God opposes the proud and 

gives grace to the humble’. 3 For the rest, where there is clearly inner knowledge and anointing that teaches all 
things, what remains for us to teach or admonish? Rather we humbly entreat you to remember us before God, 
along with those who are in spiritual communion with us. 


Odo of Soissons to Hildegard, 1148 [Letter 4o]4 


To the lady Hildegard, the exalted maiden of Christ, from the humble and unworthy Odo of Paris, master, but 
only in title and position. I send you my prayers and whatever else is deemed worthy for a person of such 
sanctity and nobility. 

Because, Lady, you have made yourself the servant of Christ, he has raised you above yourself. It is believed 
that in part the secrets of the virginal bridal chamber have been revealed to you, though you are still here in the 

flesh. You are believed to be one of those of whom it is sung: ‘The king has brought me into his chamber.’5 

But a prophetic and faithful soul says sighing: ‘My secret to myself, my secret to myself.’ 1 And King Hezekiah 
opened up the storehouses of his aromatic spices and the treasuries of the temple to the messengers from 

Babylon and so grievously angered the Lord.7 Nevertheless, blessed are they who so far excel us sinners that 
they can discern heavenly matters. And on the paths they walk they are open to the spirit of discernment for 
those who by the grace of God have gained treasures more by being tested than by revelation. And here below 
among men and women they learn from their visions what they should reveal and what they should conceal. 

Since in their humility they allow God to confer the gift upon them, they place certain things under a seal,® and 
they do not make known any things that might disturb the apostolic and ecclesiastical institutions. Wise 

woman! listen to these things, for ‘the woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.’^ They say that you are 
taken up in the heavenly places and see many things which you bring out in your writing; also, that you bring 

forth the melodies of a new song 10 although you have not studied any of these things. 

We are not at all surprised about these things, for they do not exceed the expectations we have of your purity 
and sanctity, without which no one can achieve any such things. But what we can know is that whatever is 
revealed about the saints there, manifests their glory; and whatever is practised by them here, demands a kind 
of humility. 

As far as we are concerned, we are a long way away from you, but we have the confidence to ask of you the 
following request. The fact is that many scholars argue that God is not identical with both paternity and 

divinity. 11 Please expound to us what you see in the heavens about this problem and send it to us. Farewell. 


Heinrich, Archbishop of Mainz, to Hildegard, 1151 [Letter 18] 

Heinrich, Archbishop of the see of Mainz by the grace of God, to Hildegard the beloved mistress of the 
Rupertsberg. Grace be with you and our fatherly affection. 

Since we have heard great and marvellous things about you, our neglect in not visiting as often as we could is 
to be condemned. But prevented by many matters, only rarely and reluctantly do we lift our soul to the things 
that are eternal. 

But to come to the point of this letter: we hereby announce to you that some messengers, religious from a 
certain noble church, have come to petition us about a sister who is still living in a nun’s habit in your 

monastery. 1 ^ They are asking that she be released to them now that she has been elected as abbess. Therefore 
by our authority as prelate and spiritual father, we command you, and conjoin you by this command, to release 
her immediately for her office to those who seek her and need her. If you do this, you will have our gratitude 
from this day forth more than ever before. If you do not, we will command you again more forcefully, and we 
will not cease until you fulfill our instructions in this matter. 


Henry, Bishop of Liege, to Hildegard, 1148-53 [Letter 37] 4 

Henry, by the grace of God Bishop of Liege, to Hildegard the servant of Christ and of Saint Rupert at Bingen. 
May you serve the King of kings unceasingly and gain the prize of eternal joy. 

Finding myself in great turbulence of mind and body, I decided to write to you because I need God’s mercy, 
for I must admit that I have angered his mercy with many evil actions. Therefore, dearest sister, because I know 
for certain that God is with you, I urge and admonish you in your sanctity, through his mercy, to give me your 
hand as I waver completely and as I take my refuge in you. Make it your concern to watch over me with devout 
prayers, that my negligence may be taken from me. 

Do reply to this letter and tell me what the living light has revealed to you so that I can rouse myself from 
sleep. May the most merciful God grant that through you I will perceive a most certain comfort in your writings. 
And may he grant me through your intercessions to enter the final dwelling-place of eternal peace. 


Arnold, Archbishop of Cologne, to Hildegard, H50-(?) 56 [Letter 14 ]*5 

Arnold, Archbishop of Cologne by the grace of God, to Hildegard, a burning lamp in the house of the Lord at the 
Rupertsberg. May you remain always under the protection of the heavenly God. 

If you are progressing well, and if all the things around you are guided by God, then we will rejoice. And 
because of your merits we too are progressing well. But we are unable to come to see you as we had arranged 
some time ago. As far as we are able at present, however, we will commit ourselves to you, placing our hands in 
yours, joining our faith to your faith and commending ourselves wholly to you. 

Meanwhile, whether or not it is finished, do not hesitate to send us by messenger post the book you wrote 

under the inspiration of God’s Spirit when you were far away from any interference. 11 ’ For we are unable and 
unwilling to be without it. We do not want to tempt God; rather we wish to see his miracles and wonders. 


The nun Gertrud (of Stahleck) to Hildegard, after 1161 [Letter 62] 

To Hildegard, her most lovable mother in Christ, from her own Gertrud, with a true petition that God may grant 
‘things which the eye saw not, and the ear heard not, and which entered not into the heart of man’. 1 ^ 

I am at a loss as to what I should say or write to such a unique and beloved mother in Christ, for the power of 
love has taken from me all knowledge of speech. Indeed, your divine absence has made me drunk on the wine of 

sorrow. This has upset me so much that I feel an aversion not only to dictating a letter, but even to life itself. 
For I could almost believe it better never to have seen you, never to have felt your great and heartfelt kindness 
towards me - all this rather than my ceaseless mourning for the great distance that separates me from you as 
though you were lost. 

But I hope in my God, I say my God, because I have nothing dearer than him, and I hope that he will never 
allow me to put aside this frail body before he has granted me the sweet joy of seeing you and hearing you speak 
so beautifully. But if this does not happen, because of my sins, I trust in his goodness that he will not frustrate 
my hope of allowing me to see you there, where we will never be separated from his sight. 

What more is there to say? I ask you, dearest mother, to pray for me to him in whose embraces you remain 
constant and in whose shade you repose, please pray that I will escape like a young roebuck from the heat of 
vices and temptations. I am still wandering and searching for him, but alas without finding him. Please pray that 

he will reveal himself to me and I will find him. May he allow me to sit in the shade of the one whom I desire . 20 
Farewell. 


The Abbess of St Theodore and St Mary, Bamberg, after 1157 [Letter 61] 21 

To Hildegard, beloved lady and mother, venerable in her religious life and dignity, from L., although unworthy, 
an abbess in name only at Bamberg, one only among all the nuns committed to God. You are often in our 
prayers, in whatever way the devout and frequent prayers of the lowly can be of benefit. 

Blessed lady, we rejoice in Christ, as much as we are capable, that the Lord who has ordained you as his elect 
has illumined and filled our times with the spirit of prophecy. Christ therefore has encouraged us in this above 
all, that he not only foresaw and predestined you of the female sex, but his grace also enlightened many people 
through your teaching. We therefore offer our great thanks for you and we petition with humble prayers that 
the deeds he has begun in you he will bring to perfection by his mercy, until he leads you to the things of 
eternity. 

We humbly beseech you that you will find us worthy of being received into your fellowship and that you will 
eagerly commend us to your holy community and strengthen us with letters of support. Farewell, beloved lady. 


An Abbess of Altena to Hildegard, before 1173 [Letter 49] 

To the lady and mother Hildegard, loving and worthy in Christ, intimate with his love, from N., the Abbess of 

Altena, although undeserving, a penitent sinner sitting with Mary at the feet of Christ 2 3 and hoping to see her 
loved one just as he is. 

I wish you joy in your blessed state, most loved of all women. As can be proved by your most evident delights, 
you have found the One whom your soul loves as much as is possible for mortal people to do. And spending 

happy times with him now in the secret chamber of your heart, 2 4 you have tasted and seen that the Lord is 
sweet. 2 5 

I realize that I must bear with equanimity that although I am so devoted to you, you have neglected to visit 
me with your letters. For I believe that if you could avert the eye of your mind for a moment from the 
contemplation of your beloved and take a step outside your dwelling-place of peace, you could not fail then to 
console me more often with your messenger, who would make me happy with reports of your health and would 
carry back news of me to you. For if it is not given to me to see your beloved face again in this life (and I cannot 
say this without shedding tears) nevertheless I will always be happy about you, for I have decided to love you 
like my own soul. And so I will see you with the eye of prayer until we reach our destination. There we will see 

each other forever and we will earn the right to contemplate our beloved face to face 2 in all beauty. 


Eberhard, Archbishop of Salzburg, to Hildegard, 1163-4 [Letter 25] 

Eberhard, by the grace of God servant and Archbishop of the Church at Salzburg, although unworthy, to 
Hildegard the sister and mistress of the Rupertsberg at Bingen, I pray (if the prayer of a sinner has any worth) 
that after the triumph over the flesh you will enter with your wise virgins into the embraces of the heavenly 

bridegroom.* 

I am a sinner placed in this vale of tears, exhausted by the many winds and storms of this age; I have passed 
through fears within and fears without. Eagerly I ask for your love, that you would be willing to pour forth your 
petitions on my behalf, so that divine compassion will open the heart of piety to me and mercifully carry me 
away from all my troubles. For because of the schism that has now affected the Church, the Emperor is 
attempting to use force against us. 

O virgin worthy to God, in your love you will remember that when I was at the Emperor’s court at Mainz, 2 9 I 
eagerly commended myself to your holy name so that through your intercession, the status of my life would be 
advanced in the Lord and come to a happy fruition. You also promised me in my unworthiness that once you 
had received my letter you would not hesitate to write a reply according to what the Lord was willing to reveal to 
you. In my unworthiness I beg you in your sanctity to fulfill the obligation of that promise. 

Farewell, virgin of God, and remember me. Whatever you may write in reply, please place it under a seal. 3° 


Abbot Adam to Hildegard, before 1166 [Letter 85 ] 3 * 

To the lady, his beloved mother, Hildegard, mistress of the sisters at Rupertsberg in Bingen, from brother Adam, 
although unworthy, of Ebrach. I write what little I can. 

When I first received the fame of your name, I rejoiced with a great joy.3 2 God increased my joy when, with a 
command both benevolent and marvellous, he directed you to show your face and allow your voice to be heard 

in our land.33 And he allowed me something I had scarcely been able to hope for, namely a meeting and 
conversation with you. At our meeting, as I expect you remember, I told you of my anxiety. And because 
different people feel different things - some having this experience, others that - if my prosperity and salvation 
is assured before the Lord then God be praised. But if there is danger, please pray to God that he will grant my 
soul prosperity and salvation and guard me against any kind of danger. 

On your behalf now, I am sending a messenger with a letter to the Emperor. And I hope by the grace of God 
that we will be heard. On any occasion where you need our assistance, we will be ready to serve you. 

We pray also that you will be able to pray for us, for we are tossed by a storm of worry for our brothers. We 
pray that the grace of the Holy Spirit, which works many wonders in you by the spirit of prophecy, will also look 
to us and protect us. We ask also that your letter will console us and strengthen us. 


33* From The Life of Hildegard, Book 2 , by Theoderich of Echternach 


Begun in a conventional style by Gottfried of Disibodenberg, who wrote the first of the three books which make 
up the whole work, the Life of Hildegard was commissioned by Ludwig of Trier and another Gottfried, two men 
who had both served as abbots at the monastery of Echternach, now in Luxembourg. The new author 
Theoderich included otherwise unknown autobiographical material in his text, which gives the work an 
additional interest. 



Theoderich of Echternach, Life of Hildegard, Book 2 

1 . So this blessed virgin began her book of visions at Disibodenberg, and completed it at the place to which she 
had moved at God’s command. She revealed certain things about the nature of the human being, the elements 

and the diversity of created things, and how the human being is to be helped by a knowledge of such things; 1 
and she made known many other secrets with prophetic spirit. 

It is also known how elegantly she replied to letters sent to her from diverse places, if anyone wished to 
consider more deeply the meaning of the words that she drew from the divine revelation. Indeed, the 
correspondence is gathered in one volume, both her own letters and those sent to her. 

Who is not amazed that she published songs with the sweetest melody in marvellous harmony?” And she 
compiled an alphabet of letters never seen before and a language never heard before. Apart from this, she 

commented on the Gospels and wrote other typological expositions.3 And because all these things were 
unlocked for her by the key of David ‘that openeth and no man shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth’,4 her 
soul could rejoice with good cause and sing that ‘the king hath brought her to his storerooms’5 that she might 
be ‘inebriated with the plenty of his house’, ^ and so that by fear of the Lord, as is written, she will conceive and 
give birth and bring the spirit of salvation over the earthy 

This is a good thing and worthy of praise, that those things which she heard and saw in the spirit she kept in 
her pure and careful mind, wrote down with her own hand and passed on orally with the same wording and the 

same meaning. In so doing, she was content to have one single faithful man as her fellow initiate, ^ who 
presumed, for the sake of the art of grammar of which she was ignorant, to correct the cases, tenses and 
genders, but who did not presume to add or remove anything from the sense or understanding of the text. 

Indeed she wrote to Pope Hadrian about this matter that in the heavenly vision she had heard the following 
said : ‘Since what you were shown from above you do not reproduce in the Latin language of common usage, 
since this skill has not been given you, therefore he who has the file should not neglect to perfect it to a sound 

fit for human ears. ’9 

2 . It seems appropriate at this point to insert some writings from Hildegard’s visions and show on the basis of 
these texts how appropriately the saying from the Song of Songs can be applied to her: ‘My beloved put his hand 

through the opening of the door, and I trembled to the core of my being.’ 10 These writings are as follows. 

First vision: In the mystical vision, she says, and in the light of the love from Wisdom which never fades I heard 
and saw these words as follows: 

Five tones of justice, sent to the human race by God, sound forth, in which the salvation and redemption of 
believers consists. And these five tones are more excelling than all the works of men, because all the works of 
men are nourished by them. These are tones whose sounds do not fade, with which all the works of man are 
perfected in the five senses of his body. And such is their ratio. 

The first tone was perfected by the action of the faithful sacrifice of Abel, which he brought to God; the 
second, when Noah built the ark at God’s command; the third when Moses was given the law, the end-point of 
which was the circumcision of Abraham. At the fourth tone the Word of the Father on high descended into a 
virgin’s womb and took on flesh, because the Word had mixed earth with water and so created man; therefore 
all creatures have called through a man to the one who made them, and so because of man God has carried all 
things within himself. For God created man at one time, and at another he carried him, in order to draw to him 
all those whom the serpent’s counsel had caused to be lost. But the fifth tone is perfected when all error and 
mockery is ended, and then men will see and know that no one can act in any way against God. By this means 
the Old and New Testaments are perfected in five tones and the marvellous number of humanity is brought to 
completion. And after these five tones, the son of God will be given a shining countenance, so that he is openly 
recognized by all flesh. Then the godhead will act within itself for as long as it will. 

Wisdom in the light of love also teaches me and orders me to tell how I was granted this visionary gift. I 
myself do not speak these words concerning me, rather it is true Wisdom who speaks, and this is what she says: 
listen, human being, to these words, and speak them not according to you but according to me. Learn from me, 


and speak in this way about yourself. 

When in my first formation God roused me in my mother’s womb with the breath of life, he fixed this gift of 
visions in my soul. For, by the year 1100 after the incarnation of Christ, both the teaching of the apostles and the 
burning justice which God had established in Christian men and women were beginning to grow slow and 
inconstant. 

It was in these times that I was born, and with sighs my parents dedicated me to God. And in my third year I 
saw such a light that my whole soul trembled; but because of my young age I could not put it in words. At the 

age of eight, I was offered to God for the spiritual life ; 11 and until I was fifteen I saw numerous visions and 
spoke many things about them in a simple way so that those who heard them were amazed at where they could 
have come from or who they were from. 

Then I in turn was amazed at myself, because when I saw these things in the depths of my soul, I still had the 
outward use of my eyes; and I was amazed that I did not hear of such things happening to anybody else. So I 
concealed the vision that I had in my soul as much as I could. Of the outside world I knew very little, because I 
had been so frequently ill from the time of my mother’s milk until now. My body was weakened by the illness 
and my strength had failed. 

Exhausted by all this, I asked a nurse of mine whether she could see anything else apart from external 
objects. 

‘Nothing,’ she replied, since she could not see any of these other things. 

Immediately I was gripped with a terrible fear, and I did not dare reveal the experience of these visions to 
anyone else. 

Nevertheless, I took to predicting future events, sometimes speaking many things and sometimes having 
them taken down in writing. And when I was completely steeped in the vision I spoke many things that were 
very strange to those who were listening. But when the power of the vision had lessened, then I behaved more 
in the character of a child than of someone of my years; I was terribly ashamed, and often wept, and on many 
occasions I would much rather have kept quiet if I had been allowed to. 

Because of the fear that I felt towards other people, I did not dare tell anyone actually how I saw my visions; 
but a certain woman of high rank to whom I had been sent for my upbringing became aware of this and revealed 
it to a monk that she knew. 

God filled this woman with his grace like a channel of many waters, so that she gave her body no rest from 
vigils, fasting and other good works until she worthily ended her present life, the merits of which God has made 
plain with various beautiful signs. After her end I continued to see visions until the fortieth year of my life. 

Then, in the same experience of a vision, I was compelled by a great pressure of pains to make known what I 
had seen and heard. Yet I was terribly afraid and ashamed to put into words what I had kept quiet for so long. 
But then my veins and marrow became filled with powers I had lacked in my childhood and youth. 

I intimated these experiences to the monk who was my teacher. A reliable man of high standing in the 
cloistered life, he was like a pilgrim from the coarseness of behaviour of many men. Willingly he listened to my 
account of these marvels. He was astonished and commanded me to write them down secretly until he could see 
what they were and where they might be from. But thinking that they might well be from God, he intimated this 
to the abbot, and from then on he eagerly worked with me at writing them down. 

In that same vision I understood the writings of the prophets, evangelists and other saints, and certain 
philosophers, although I had not had any human instruction, and I expounded some of their writings, although 
I hardly had any knowledge of letters, because an uneducated woman had taught me. But also I composed and 
sang songs with melodies in praise of God and the saints, again without any human instruction, although I had 
never learned neums or singing. 

When these things were brought to an audience at the cathedral in Mainz and discussed there, all said that 
they were from God, and from prophecy, in the same manner as the prophets of old used to prophesy. Then my 
writings were presented to Pope Eugenius III when he was at Trier. Willingly he had them read in the presence 
of many, and he himself read them out. And trusting fully in the grace of God, he sent me to put into writing, 
more attentively than I had before, all those things that I had seen and heard. 


34* Gebeno of Eberbach: The Pentachronon 


During Hildegard’s lifetime the monastery of Eberbach in the Rhinegau had enjoyed good relations with 
Rupertsberg. In 1220, perhaps influenced by the current interest in Foachim of Fiore, Prior Gebeno of Eberbach 
set about compiling his Pentachronon (The Five Ages), a prophetic work based on excerpts from Hildegard’s 
writings. The extract he made from the following correspondence well illustrates his technique. In 1150 Conrad 
III ( King of Germany before Barbarossa) had written to Hildegard after his elder son and heir Henry had died 
leaving only a six-year-old brother to succeed to the throne. As a reply, Hildegard wrote in her prophetic 
manner, but nevertheless sent some general personal and political advice. For his excerpt, however, Gebeno 

chose only the second half of Hildegard’s letter, 1 thus omitting all the personal context of the original exchange 
of letters. 


[Conrad III to Hildegard ] 2 

Conrad, by divine grace and favour King of the Romans, to Hildegard, the maiden dedicated to God and teacher 
of the sisters of St Rupert in Bingen, greetings and favour. 

Prevented by our regal position and shaken by various winds and storms, we are unable to visit you as we 
would wish. Nevertheless we have not neglected to write a letter to you, for, as we have heard, you are truly held 
in abundant high regard because of the sanctity of your innocent life and because of the glory of the Spirit 
descending upon you so marvellously. Therefore, although we lead a secular life, we hurry to you, we take our 
refuge in you and we humbly seek the help of your prayers and exhortations. For we live very differently from 
how we should. 

Nevertheless you can assume that wherever we can we will certainly hasten to serve and support you and 

your sisters in every cause and need. Therefore I commend myself and my son, whom I wish to succeed me, 3 to 
your prayers. 


[Hildegard to Conrad III] 


The One who gives life to all says this. Blessed are they who subject themselves worthily to the office of the high 
king. For them God has provided in his great foresight so that he does not allow them to fall from his lap. 
Remain there, O King, and cast away all squalor from your mind. For God preserves all who seek him purely. 
Hold your kingdom in the same manner and dispense justice to all your subjects, so that you do not become 
separated from the heavenly kingdom. 

Listen! [Gebeno’s text begins here:] In a certain way you are from God. The times in which you live are light- 
headed like a woman. They are moving towards a hostile injustice which is trying to destroy the justice in God’s 
vineyard. Afterwards, worse times will come in which the true Israelites will be scourged and the Catholic 
throne will be shaken by error, and so their proclamations will be blasphemies like a dead body. Therefore this 
pain will be smoke in the vineyard of the Lord. And after these, stronger times will arise in which the justice of 
God will be raised up somewhat and the injustice of the spiritual people will be marked out for ejection and they 
will not yet be provoked to contrition. But then other times will appear, in which the riches of the Church will be 
dispersed, so that the spiritual people will be torn as by wolves, and they will be expelled from their places and 
their homeland. Therefore the first of them will cross to solitude, successively having a poor life in great 
contrition of heart and thus serving God in great humility. In fact, the first times will be neglectful of God’s 
justice, the following truly weary. Those times which come thereafter will rise somewhat to justice; but those 
which arise afterwards will divide both like a bear, and their riches will accumulate through evil; but those 
which follow will manifest the sign of a manly strength, so that all the perfumers will run to the first dawn of 
justice with fear, shame and wisdom; and the princes will have unanimous agreement, like a victorious man 
raising a standard against erring times of great error, which God will destroy and exterminate as he knows and 
as it pleases him. 

And again he who knows all things speaks to you, O king. Hear these things, O mortal man, restrain yourself 
by your will and correct yourself, so that you come to those times purified, and then you will no longer be 
ashamed of your actions. 



35* From the Canonization Protocol 


In the thirteenth century, just as the need arose for Hildegard’s sanctity to be confirmed, the process of official 
papal recognition of a saint became more rigorous and discriminating. In this new development, the procedure 
for canonization was entrusted to a special commission, which arranged interviews with those who had 
known the saint during his or her lifetime or with those who had knowledge of miracles reported to have taken 
place in some way due to the saint’s influence. The canonization protocol for Hildegard herself was compiled 
during the pontificate of Pope Gregory IX (1227-41). The first protocol was completed in 1233 but rejected for 
the lack of corroborating influence, especially the lack of reliable names of interviewees or of people reported to 
have been cured by Hildegard’s influence. A second protocol was commissioned in 1237 and finished by 1243, 
but there is no evidence that it actually reached Rome; perhaps the prelates of Mainz, the diocese under which 
Hildegard’s monastery fell, decided to abandon the case. In the end, therefore, the case for Hildegard’s sanctity 
was decided unofficially by the popular devotion of local Rhineland churches, and today Hildegard features as 
the focus of devotion in a number of well-known locations, notably of course in Eibingen and Disibodenberg. 

In the following extracts from the canonization protocol, the accompanying letter is addressed to Pope 
Gregory IX by the delegates of the commission, Gerbod, Walter and Arnold of Mainz. The delegates in turn cite 
Gregory’s letter in full before continuing with the actual findings of the commission. 



From the Canonization Protocol 


l. To the most holy Father, Lord Gregory, the supreme priest of the holy Roman Church, from the cathedral 
provost Gerbod, the dean Walter and the scholar Arnold of St Peter’s in Mainz. Our respects to you in due 
reverence and devotion. We received the commission from you in the following form: 

2.1. ‘Bishop Gregory, the servant of the servants of God, to his well-beloved sons the cathedral provost, the dean 
and the scholar of St Peter’s in Mainz. We send our greetings and apostolic blessing. 

2.2. ‘God, who is marvellous in his saints, confirms by the power of miracles those who sowed the seed in tears, 
and he shows by a series of signs that he gives eternal glory to them for their merits. Accordingly, the beloved 
daughters of Christ, the abbess and sisters of the monastery of Rupertsberg in the diocese of Mainz, have made 
the following request. Because up till now, God has caused many miracles to be performed, and intends to 
perform even more, through the merits of Saint Hildegard of blessed memory, the abbess of the above- 
mentioned monastery, and because Hildegard, who did not study any writings other than the Psalter, composed 
many books, by the revelation of the Holy Spirit, worthy of notice to the Roman Church; and because we have 
heard of her praiseworthy and holy way of life while we were working in a lesser office and were sent as legates 
into the areas of Germany, for all these reasons we ought now to exalt her on the earth whom the lord has 
honoured in the heavens, by canonizing her and inscribing her name in the catalogue of the saints. And we 
should order her books to be brought to us and given authority by us that they might be received and read by all. 

2.3. ‘Alight in the darkness should not be concealed, nor a town on a mountain be hidden. Whatever God has 
worked through the merits of Hildegard should be brought to light because she is said to have shone with 
miracles so that she is held to be a saint in the above-mentioned regions. For these reasons, we are inclined to 
accept the requests of the aforesaid women who believe that something with such obvious proof should not be 
neglected. We therefore command you by these apostolic writs, that you should diligently research the truth, on 
our behalf, about her life, monastic calling, reputation, merits and miracles, and in general to find out all the 
circumstances of her life, with the help of reliable witnesses, and then to expound to us what you have found 
faithfully under your seals and send us the aforesaid books under seal by a reliable courier. If you cannot all be 
present at these inquiries, then at least two of you should be there. Date in the Lateran, 27th January, in the 
first year of our pontificate.’ 

3. With the mandate of his authority, and having travelled in person to the monastery of Saint Rupert, we 
received the faithful witnesses with questions on the life, behaviour, reputation, merits, signs and other 
circumstances of the blessed Hildegard, rejecting a good many witnesses, since no more time could be had for 
the great number of witnesses available. 

4.1. The Abbess of Rupertsberg 1 in Bingen, called Elisa, testified under oath to the miracles of the blessed 
Hildegard. She said that she saw how Mechthild, from the village of Lebenheim, was freed from demon 
possession at Hildegard’s grave. She also saw how the noblewomen Reguwize and Seguwize were freed from 

demons in the same manner in the actual presence of the blessed Hildegard. 2 Afterwards they both served all 
their lives in the same monastery. She also saw several epileptics healed at the same place (as for their names, 

these are unknown, though God knows). Likewise people suffering from a tertian or quartan fever 3 were healed 
by the invocation of Hildegard’s name at her tomb (their names are unknown because so much time has 
passed). Agnes the Prioress gave the same account under oath, as did the sister of the abbess. Also, the 
custodian Beatrix, Odilia the cellarer and Hedwig the lay sister claim under oath to have seen the same things. 

4.2. The priest Rorich says the same under oath, but he added that when he came to exorcize the possessed 
woman Mechthild, and even before he had spoken to her, she called out his double name ‘Heinrich-Rorich’, 
which had been unknown to them in those parts before that day. He also saw four ravens sitting at that time in 
the windows inside the church. When he asked the demoniac Mechthild who the ravens were, she replied saying 
that they were the demon’s companions waiting for him to be driven out. Having said this, she opened her 
mouth and breathed out a cloud of black smoke. In this way, the possessed woman was freed, and at once the 

ravens disappeared. The more reasonable part4 of the convent testify to the same under oath. 


4-3- He also adds that he saw eighteen demoniacs freed by the invocation of the same virigin’s name before her 
tomb (their names and places of origin are not known). The priest Daniel says the same under oath, as does the 
provost. When, in the course of questions, the abbess was asked about the timing, she said that all these things 
had happened thirty years previously. 

[•••] 

9.1. The same [healing of demoniacs and epileptics] is told under oath by Hedwig of Alzey, and she adds that the 
blessed Hildegard was constantly in bed because of God’s scourge, until she was enlightened by the Holy Spirit, 

and then, walking through the convent, she would feel moved to sing the sequence O virga ac diadema .5 The 
custodian and the female cellarer agree with this under oath. 

9.2. [Hedwig of Alzey] again says that she saw a burning candle on the blessed Hildegard’s grave when a mass 
for the dead was being sung. After it was extinguished and the reading of the Gospel was begun, the candle was 
found to have lighted itself again, not once, but several times. 

9.3. She also saw a man (whose name is unknown) insane, bound, and possessed by a demon, and several 
people held him by force on top of Hildegard’s grave. But in the end he freed himself from their hands and 
plunged into the river Nahe, which is at the foot of the mountain. And when most of the bystanders thought that 
he was dead, by the invocation of the grace of this virgin he was pulled out of the river alive. He confessed that 
he had been freed of the demon and he said that he had been protected from the water by the sleeve of the 
blessed virgin Hildegard. Public opinion in Bingen agrees that this happened, as does the greater part of the 
convent, under oath. 

[...] 

11.4. [The abbess] learned also that a certain noble lady of Trier (whose name is unknown) had gone mad 
through the magic of a certain young man, with the result that she was completely out of her mind. Her parents 
were grieving, and took refuge with the blessed Hildegard, seeking her grace. Hildegard took bread from her 
table, blessed it and gave it to the sick girl, who immediately tasted it and was cured. This miracle was seen by 
Odilia the cellarer and Hedwig the lay sister (as they swore under oath), who were both sitting at the table with 
the blessed Hildegard. 

12.1. Likewise, when a certain man, who had been unjustly excommunicated, was buried at her monastery, and 
when, because of this, the Church of Mainz suspended the divine services and ordered that he be removed, she 
(the blessed Hildegard) made the sign of the cross over his grave with her staff so that his tomb could no longer 
be found. 

[...] 

12.3. Likewise, when the Bishop of Mainz, called Christian, was received in Bingen with the ringing of all the 
bells, Hildegard understood the bells sounding in the following way. One bell rang out the words ‘Shepherd, 
mourn!’ while the other rang ‘Flee quickly to your salvation!’ These words seemed to be addressed to the 
Bishop. The third bell rang out in the voice of the Bishop: ‘I will depart and leave this land in confusion.’ She 
said these words to the nuns who were present when she was in the spirit. This is confirmed under oath by 
Prioress Agnes, custodian Odilia, Sophia and several others. 

14.1. Bruno, custodian and priest at St Peter’s in Strasbourg, speaks under oath of the life of the blessed 
Hildegard, according to what he has heard of her public reputation, and according to what he has read in the 
little book of her Life, which, when the blessed virgin died, was written immediately after her death by the two 
monks Gottfried and Theoderich. 


14.2. He believes that this contains the truth in all aspects, namely, that she originated from noble parents, that 


when she was five she saw a cow and said to her nurse: ‘Look how beautiful the calf is inside the cow, all white 
with dark patches on his forehead, feet and back!’ The astonished nurse immediately told Hildegard’s mother of 
this. Her mother commanded the woman whose cow it was to show her the calf as soon as the cow gave birth. 
When this was all done as the blessed Hildegard had predicted, her mother realized that it was true. Her parents 
were amazed, and seeing that she had a different character from other people, they decided to enclose her in a 
monastery. When she was eight, they dedicated her as an oblate to serve the Lord in Disibodenberg under the 
rule of the blessed Benedict, entrusting her to a certain recluse named Jutta, the sister of the Count of 
Spanheim. 

14.3. Concerning her monastic vocation, he says that her reputation for sanctity spread widely and very many 
girls of noble family streamed to her. But when the anchorage building could not contain them all, she was 
admonished by the Lord, and indeed compelled, to move to the Rupertsberg. How she conveyed the news to the 
Abbot through her confessor and how he received it badly; how she miraculously obtained permission, moved to 
the location shown to her by God and built a monastery there in that unfamiliar place; how she began to serve 
the Lord there with eighteen girls of noble family: all this is found in detail in the little book of the Life of 
Hildegard. In this monastery, she established fifty benefices for noble ladies, two for priests, and seven for poor 
women in honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary. As well as this, she founded another monastery half a mile away 
across the Rhine, where she established thirty benefices. 

14.4. On her reputation, he says that three popes heard of her fame and wrote to her, namely: Eugenius, Hadrian 
and Anastasius. The Archbishops of Mainz, Cologne, Trier and Magdeburg corresponded with her, also the 
Patriarch of Jerusalem, very many bishops, the holy abbot Bernard of Clairvaux, other abbots and provosts, and 
other prelates of churches; to all of these she sent replies. This information is taken from Hildegard’s Book of 
Letters. 

14.5. In addition, she began, in the forty-second year of her life (although she had no earthly teacher), to write 
not a few books by the revelation of the Holy Spirit, which are more fully described in the introduction to her 
book Scivias. She wrote the book Scivias, which took eleven years to complete. She wrote the Book of Simple 
Medicine, the Book of Composite Medicine, the Book of the Exposition of the Gospels, the Songs of Heavenly 
Harmony and the Unknown Language, with its alphabet, all of which she completed in eight years, as is told 
more fully in the preface to the Book of Life’s Merits. Finally, she wrote the Book of Divine Works in seven 
years, which is revealed in greater detail in the introduction to that book. 

[•••] 

14.7. On signs, he says that he believes in every way that the signs which the Lord performed through her in her 
life (which are also written up in the book of her Life) are true, and he believes that the miracles which the Lord 
performed through her, both during her life and after her death, are more than human memory can hold. 

14.8. On the further circumstances of her life, he says that after he had made copies of her books according to 
the exemplars in his monastery, namely Scivias, the Book of Life’s Merits and the Book of Divine Works, and 
after he had decided to make a pilgrimage to St Martin’s, he took the above-mentioned books with him to Paris. 
And so that he could study them more securely, he managed (with great trouble and effort) to obtain permission 

from the then bishop of the locality to summon a meeting of all the masters then reading lectures in theology.^ 5 

He gave to each of them twelve books,? to be examined in the period from the octave of St Martin to the octave 
of Epiphany. After they had examined them, they returned them to the bishop. The latter then entrusted the 

books to William of Auxerre, a master of Paris at that time,^ who returned them to him confirming what the 
opinion of the masters was: that the words contained in them were not of human but divine origin. 

14.9. On her reputation, [Bruno] says this. When his mother was in a village called Lorch, about two miles away 
from the monastery Hildegard had built, and when she heard from some other woman of the reputation for 
sanctity of the blessed Hildegard, she took her son with her in a ferry, crossed the river and begged Hildegard to 
place her hand of blessing upon him. Which she also did. 


14-10. On the examination of the books, master Arnold, a scholar of St Peter’s, who was studying theology at the 
time, says the same as Bruno. William, a canon of St John’s in Mainz, agrees under oath with Bruno, apart from 
the account of the testing of the books and the story of Bruno’s visit to blessed Hildegard. The greater part of the 
monastery agrees under oath with all of Bruno’s account except for his visit to Hildegard. 

14.11. Master John, a canon at Mainz, and now Provost in Bingen, agrees with the above account of the testing of 
the books, as he was studying theology in Paris at the time. He also says that a few people still living know 
better than he does about the truth of Saint Hildegard. 



NOTES 



INTRODUCTION 


1. For the correspondence, see the ongoing standard edition in translation by Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. 
Ehrman, The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, so far in two volumes (Oxford, 1994 and 1998). For the vision of 
Lady Philosophy, see Boethius, The Consolation of Philosophy, trans. V. E. Watts (Harmondsworth, 1969). 

2. See R. Benson and G. Constable (eds), Renaissance and Renewal in the Twelfth Century (Oxford, 1982). 

3. For an introduction see Jean Leclercq, Bernard of Clairvaux and the Cistercian Spirit (Kalamazoo, 1976). 

4. From On Consideration, in Pauline Matarasso (trans.), The Cistercian World. Monastic Writings of the 
Twelfth Century (Harmondsworth, 1993), p. 86. 

5. From An Apologia for Abbot Adam, in The Cistercian World, p. 55. 

6. Letter 90, in The Cistercian World, p. 97. 

7. From On Spiritual Friendship , in The Cistercian World, p. 173. 

8. The concept of spiritual friendship is discussed by Sabina Flanagan, ‘Spirituals Amicitia in a Twelfth-Century 
Convent? Hildegard of Bingen and Richardis of Stade’, in Parergon, Bulletin of the Australian and New Zealand 
Association for Medieval and Renaissance Studies 29 (1981), pp. 15-21. 

9. There is evidence from the letter to Werner of Kirchheim (Letter 149R in the standard edition) that Hildegard 
had read Boethius. 

10. W. J. Millor and C. N. L. Brooke (ed. and trans.), The Letters of John of Salisbury. Volume 2. The Later 
Letters ( 1163-80 ) (Oxford, 1979), Letter 185, p. 224. 

11. Letter 103R, to Guibert of Gembloux, written in 1175. The translation is by Robert Carver in Fiona Bowie and 
Oliver Davies (eds), Hildegard of Bingen. An Anthology (London, 1990), pp. 145-6. 

12. Adapted from Robert Carver’s translation in ibid., p. 146. 

13. The Old Testament story of Huldah the prophetess must have provided an appropriate model for Elisabeth, 
and perhaps also for Hildegard. As told in II Kings 22:8-20, Huldah was consulted by King Josiah about the 
meaning of the book of the law and responded with a stern prophecy and admonition addressed to the king. 

14. Elizabeth Alvilda Petroff (ed.), Medieval Women’s Visionary Literature (New York and Oxford, 1986), p. 159. 

15. The letter to Ludwig, probably written on completion of The Book of Divine Works, is translated in Peter 
Dronke, Women Writers of the Middle Ages (Cambridge, 1984), p. 194. 

16. Translation by Franz H. Bauml, Medieval Civilisation in Germany, 800-1273 (London, 1969), p. 122. 

17. For a history of the Cathars, see Yuri Stoyanov, The Hidden Tradition in Europe (Harmondsworth, 1994). 

18. The image of the pearl in the earth is used for instance in Scivias II, 2, 4 (5). 

19. See Psalm 23, ‘The Lord is my Shepherd’. The parable of the Lost Sheep is told in Luke 15:3-7, while the 
story of the Good Shepherd (John 10:1-16) mentions the threatening wolf, as in Hildegard’s fable. 

20. Peter Dronke, ‘The Allegorical World-Picture of Hildegard of Bingen: Reevaluations and New Problems’, in 
Charles Burnett and Peter Dronke (eds), Hildegard of Bingen: The Context of her Thought and Art (London, 
1998), pp. 1-16, p. 12. 

21. Personification allegory is used sparingly in the early thirteenth -century romance Tristan by Gottfried of 
Strassburg. In one scene Tristan’s mental struggle against falling in love with Isolde (his king’s betrothed) is 
depicted as a conflict in which he is pulled in different directions by the opposing demands of Honour and Lady 
Love. See Gottfried of Strassburg, Tristan, ed. R. Krohn (Stuttgart, 1985), lines 11, 756-72. 

22. Cum processit is track 4 on the CD Canticles of Ecstasy, by the music ensemble Sequentia, recorded in 
Cologne, June 1993. 

23. Bowie and Davies (eds), Hildegard of Bingen, p. 151. 

24. Katherine Kerby-Fulton, Ref ormist Apocalypticism and Piers Plowman (Cambridge, 1990). 

25. A short but useful guide to Gebeno’s selections from Hildegard is printed by Johannes Baptista Pitra in his 
Analecta sanctae Hildegardis opera spicilegio solesme parata, in the series Analecta sacra, vol. VIII 
(Montecassino, 1882), pp. 483-8. 


26. Giles Constable, ‘The Popularity of Twelfth -Century Spiritual Writers in the Late Middle Ages’, in Anthony 
Malho and John Tedeschi (eds), Renaissance Studies in Honor of Hans Baron (Florence, 1971), pp. 3-28. 

27. For references, see Barbara Newman, Sister of Wisdom. St Hildegard’s Theology of the Feminine (Berkeley, 
CA, 1987), p. 5. 

28. Noel Brann, The Abbot Trithemius (1462-1516): The Renaissance of Monastic Humanism (Leiden, 1981). 


l. Letter to Bernard of Clairvaux 


1. [Letter l ]: The standard numbering of the letters follows the edition of the letters by Li even Van Acker, 
Hildegardis Bingensis Epistolarium CCCM 9i-9ia (Turnhout, 1991 and 1993) and the translation by Joseph L. 
Baird and Radd K. Ehrman, The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, 2 vols (Oxford, 1994 and 1998). This in turn 
follows the original manuscript arrangement of the collected correspondence in which the letters are ordered 
hierarchically according to the rank and importance of the correspondent. Bernard’s letter is clearly significant, 
for it is placed first, even before the various letters to the popes. 

2. the banner of the Holy Cross... pagans: A reference to the preparations for the Second Crusade, fought 
between 1147 and 1149. To ‘preach the cross’ meant to obtain military support for the Crusade by preaching in 
towns and cities throughout the country. An account of such preaching (for the Third Crusade 1189-92), and the 
fervent support it could inspire, is given in the first chapter of The Journey through Wales by Gerald of Wales, 
trans. Lewis Thorpe (Harmondsworth, 1978), pp. 74-7. 

3. the simple meaning... textual analysis: Hildegard claimed a reading knowledge of Latin, as acquired perhaps 
gradually and subconsciously by many years of participation in the liturgy and by meditated reading of the 
scriptures and the Fathers of the Church. Other than learning to read the Latin psalms, she had not had access 
to any formal study of Latin grammar or rhetoric. For a discussion of the ways in which Hildegard could have 
acquired Latin, see the article by M. Atherton, ‘The Visions of Hildegard and the Silent Period. A Case Study of 
Language Acquisition’, System 21, no. 4 (1993), pp. 503-508. 

4. through your word: Hildegard hopes to receive an answer to her letter which she will ‘hear’ when Bernard’s 
letter is read aloud. 

5. wooden beam... world: The wooden beam of the wine-press (itself a common image in Hildegard) is linked by 
a chain of association with ideas of the tree of the Garden of Eden in Genesis and the root of the race of Adam. 
The associative method is typical of early medieval approaches to the exegesis and interpretation of scripture 
but is particularly common in Hildegard. It leads to her characteristic ‘mixed metaphors’, which occur 
particularly frequently in her songs. 

6. the eagle staring at the sun: The eagle is an image from the tradition of the bestiary, the class of book popular 
in the medieval period in which natural history is mixed with allegorical explanation. In Hildegard’s thought, 
the eagle represents people who have the strength and maturity to understand the ways of God, who in turn is 
symbolized by the brightness of the sun and referred to traditionally as the ‘Sun of Justice’. In a short letter of 
c.H50(?) to an Abbot at Busenberg [Letter 71], Hildegard uses similar imagery: ‘The light in the light speaks to 
you. Be a good servant in your mind. Watch with a good will. Imitate the eagle that gazes at the sun rather than 
at the shadow of the shadow. Do not become tired of good works either! Instead, keep your hand on the plough 
with the strength of your mind. Feed your flock justly, as well as you can, with God’s help. With all your 
strength, run with the eagle that gazes at the light so that you are not snatched away by listlessness. Flee also 
the darkness of impiety, just as God makes things clear in the cause of good will. For God wants you dead to the 
things of the world and alive to the life of sanctification. Now live for ever.’ 

7. For Bernard’s reply to this letter, see 32, Letter iRto Hildegard. 


2. The Action of the Will (from Scivias) 


1. you are not a bundle... knowledge of the scriptures: Hildegard appears to mean: ‘As a human being you are 
more complex than you imagine, and you will learn this when sacred writings are explained to you.’ The phrase 
‘you are not a bundle of veins’ translates the Latin ‘quae non es sarcina medullarum’. The expression is an 
example of where Hildegard’s words and images remain obscure and allusive. In the previous section (I, 4, 17) 
she has been speaking about old age and how the ‘bones and veins incline to weakness’, which perhaps gives a 
hint of her meaning. 

2. oven : The transforming effect of intense heat is a basic assumption behind this image of the will as a fire in 
an oven. 


3. Redemption (from Scivias) 


1. neither ablaze with the strength of strong lions... exhalations: This is probably an allusion to the strength of 
the learning and teaching of the trained scholars, from whom Hildegard felt distanced because she was, in her 
own words, merely a frail, uneducated woman. 

2. a secret seal on the vision: As the correspondence of the period shows, a seal was a standard way of ensuring 
secrecy for a letter. But the theme is also biblical. In Revelation 5:1, John the Divine says: ‘And I saw in the right 
hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the back, close sealed with seven seals.’ 

3 .And I saw a light-filled man emerge: The Latin reads ‘Vidique de eodemfulgore praefatae aurorae 
serenissimum hominem egredientem’, suggesting that the figure is literally ‘the clearest man’, i.e. an image of 
Christ. A look at the illustration, reproduced in the Latin edition and in many books on Hildegard, is useful for 
understanding the iconography Hildegard herself gives on the exegesis of the image at II, 1, 13 (see below). 

4. as a woman... uneducated: The Latin has ‘in nomine femineo indocta’, ‘untaught in your feminine name’. The 
whole of this paragraph spoken by the voice from the fire provides a justification for Hildegard to continue in 
her work as a female visionary and divine mouthpiece. Only with such a status can she feel justified in 
proceeding further in the predominantly male world of literature and philosophy. Cf. her letter to Bernard of 
Clairvaux from about the same period (1). 

5 .fickleness: The Latin has ‘petulantia’; cf. The Book of Life’s Merits (27) for a detailed treatment of this failing. 

6 . The ‘shining fire’ which you see: Hildegard conventionally presents the whole of the subsequent exegesis and 
explication of the vision as a transcription of the message spoken by the voice from the living fire. At intervals, 
we are reminded of the origin of this voice addressing Hildegard with the second person singular ‘you’ or 
speaking of ‘my’ inspiration; nevertheless, at least for the modern reader, it is tempting to forget this is the 
divine voice and to regard it as the words of Hildegard herself. 

7. ‘Who knoweth not... all mankind’: Job 12:9-10. 

8. all the causes and relationships which make up its fruitfulness and fertility: A paraphrase of the Latin ‘quod 
uicissitudinem plenitudinis suae in illis causis ignoret in quibus fructuosa consistit’, literally, ‘that he should be 
ignorant of the alternation of the fullness in the causes in which fruitfulness consists’. 

9. sighs, groanings and desires for God: Psalm 38:9: ‘Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not 
hid from thee.’ 

10. Therefore, also, the human being contains the likeness of heaven and earth within her: Hildegard’s 
anthropology is broadly humanistic in its scope. Note the similar statement in The Book of Life’s Merits VI, lines 
263 and 267: ‘God has perfected all his works in the human being... The human creature thus bears all thins in 
her body...’ 

11. through the pure green vigour: Latin ‘per viriditatem suauitatis’. 

12. the localized word: Latin ‘per locale verbum’: human speech, which is fleeting and impermanent compared 
to the divine Word of creation. 

13. commands of a ruler... his commands: Hildegard compares the word spoken by a person in authority with 
the strength of God’s Word. 

14. the functioning word... the perfectly filled Word: The impermanent, pragmatic, human ‘word’ is the capacity 
for speech, the crowning glory of homo loquens which sets human beings apart from the animal world. Opposed 
to it is the eternal, permanent, fully fixed, divine ‘Word’, the expression of the holiness and perfection of God 
the Father. 

15. And suddenly a dark sphere... never absent: In this account the dark material out of which the world is made 
is compared to air, one of the four elements of medieval science, along with earth, fire and water. This primal 
matter is spherical, because it is somehow encompassed by God’s power, and still dark because it is incomplete, 
since it has not yet collided with the divine fire of creation. 

16. ‘And it heated the clump of earth, turning it to flesh and blood’: For Hildegard, heat is the important force 
that transforms one substance into another. 


17- earth is the material out of which human flesh is made... a mother suckling a child: In the Genesis account 
of creation, God creates Adam out of the dust of the earth and breathes life into him. Hildegard retells this story 
in her own words and concepts. According to her, the Latin term materia represents the basic ‘matter’ of the 
universe, used to create human beings, but also linked by etymology with the word mater, ‘mother’. This 
suggests to Hildegard the analogy of the mother suckling her child and the earth nourishing the human being. 
18. a rational human being made up of body and soul: The idea of the wholeness of the human being clashes 
with the dualistic notions of the Cathars, against whom Hildegard was to preach in Cologne. 

19 .Abraham, Isaac and Jacob... in their family relationship: Hildegard’s text speaks of the three prophets being 
linked ‘carnis coniunctione’ (‘by conjunction of the flesh’), in other words, they are linked on the literal level by 
their relationship as members of the same family. As often in medieval exegesis of the Bible, the figures of the 
Old Testament are seen as prefiguring the teachings of the New. On the figurative or typological level of 
interpretation, therefore, the three men are seen also as signs symbolizing and prefiguring the Trinity of the 
New Testament. 

20. ‘The iniquity... O underworld’: Cf. Hosea 13:12-14. 

21. the one who came to himself... back to his father: At the end of the parable of the Prodigal Son, the runaway 
son, now suffering from hunger, decides to return: ‘But when he came to himself, he said... I will arise and go to 
my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight: I am no more worthy to 
be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.’ See Luke 15:17-32, especially 17-19, for the full 
parable. 

22. ‘This is my beloved Son: Matthew 3:17. 

23. human reason: Hildegard places great emphasis on human reason, or rationality (Latin rationalitas) in the 
process of salvation. See, for instance, the homilies on the Nativity (24). 


4* Letter to Odo of Soissons 


1. Rheims: Gilbert’s ideas are discussed by Adelgundis Fiihrkotter in Hildegard von Bingen. Briefwechsel 
(Salzburg, 1965), pp. 42-3. For Odo’s letter to Hildegard, see 32. For another letter of dense theological content 
sent by Hildegard in response to a query see letter 31R, translated by Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman, The 
Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, vol. 1 (Oxford, 1994). 

2. ‘I am who I am’: Cf. Exodus 3:14. 


5. The Trinity (from Scivias) 


1. hard-heartedness: Latin ‘obduratio’. 

2. supremely just uniformity: Latin ‘iustissima aequitas’. 

3. towards the end of all time: Latin ‘sub fine temporum’. 

4. my loved one: A traditional description associated with the apostle John. 

5. ‘The love of God... propitiation for our sins’: I John 4:9-10. 

6. his most precious pearl - the human being: On Hildegard’s use of pearl imagery, see the discussion in the 
Introduction, III.i. 

7. In a stone there is moist greenness, palpable strength and red-burning fire: The Latin terms are ‘umida 
viriditas’, ‘palpabilis comprehensio’ and ‘rutilans ignis’. The practical uses and applications of various stones are 
treated more fully in Hildegard’s treatise The Book of Gemstones (22). 

8. who comes into contact... and falls ill: In medieval science, stones were believed to contain varying 
proportions of energy and moisture (fire and water), while in the medical lore of the period it was believed that 
an imbalance of the four elements in the human body could lead to ill-health (see 22). 

9. sound, force and breath: The three Latin terms which Hildegard employs for the parts of the word are: sonus, 
virtus, and flatus. Note their different uses elsewhere. Sonus is the sacred ‘sound’ which Hildegard refers to in 
the letter to Bernard of Clairvaux (1), while virtus normally has the double sense of both ‘virtue’ and ‘power’. 

10. the first and the last: See Revelation 1:17. 

11. ‘Remember your Creator... I do not like them’: Ecclesiastes 12: 1. 

12. the sense of life: Hildegard’s term is ‘vivificatio’. 

13. the behaviour of childhood: Hildegard’s conception of personal development from childishness to maturity 
may derive from St Paul; it features also in an autobiographical passage in the Life of Hildegard where she 
describes her own behaviour as a young woman struggling to cope with her visionary gift: ‘then I behaved more 
in the character of a child than of someone of my years’ (33). 


6. Letter to Pope Eugenius III 


l. this writing: A reference to Hildegard’s Scivias. 


7. Songs for Saint Disibod 


1. 0 mirum admirandum. Antiphon for Saint Disibod: Pudentiana Barth and Immaculata Ritscher (eds), 
Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder (Salzburg, 1969), no. 28 and Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. 
Symphonia, 2nd edn (Ithaca, 1998), no. 41. An antiphon is a song sung by two choirs during the alternate 
chanting of psalms in the liturgy. 

2. O viriditas digiti dei. Responsory for Saint Disibod: Barth and Ritscher, Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder, no. 29 
and Newman, Symphonia, no. 42. A responsory is so called because the song ‘responds’ to a scripture reading 
during the church service. 


8. Letter to Hartwig of Bremen 


1. Hartwig... Richardis... Hildegard: Hildegard came into open conflict with Hartwig over the appointment of 
his sister Richardis as Abbess of Bassum, in the diocese of Bremen. There is no mention of this conflict here, 
and little in the letter allows for a precise dating. 

2. ‘You are gods... most high’: Psalm 82:6. Elsewhere, Hildegard saw the reference to ‘gods’ as indicating a 
bishop’s spiritual life and ‘sons of the most high’ as signifying his role in the pastoral care of the people of his 
diocese. See Letter 25R to Eberhard, Archbishop of Salzburg (30). 

3. ‘Who are these that fly as clouds... windows?’: Isaiah 60:8. A common image in Hildegard, used at the 
beginning of The Play of the Virtues. See also 9, note 7. 


9. Song for Saint Ursula 


1. 0 Ecclesia oculi tui. Sequence : Pudentiana Barth and Immaculata Ritscher (eds), Hildegard von Bingen. 

Lieder (Salzburg, 1969), no. 54 and Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. Symphonia, 2nd edn (Ithaca, 
1998), no. 64. 

2. like sapphire: Cf. Ezekiel 1:26, a vision of four-winged creatures: ‘Above the expanse over their heads was 
what looked like a throne of sapphire...’ 

3. like Mount Bethel: See Genesis 28:11-22, the story of Jacob’s dream at Bethel, where he saw a stairway 
reaching from earth to heaven on which angels were ascending and descending; in the same vision he heard a 
voice promising that all peoples on earth would be blessed through his descendants. 

4. a mountain of myrrh and incense: Song of Songs (or Song of Solomon) 4:6: ‘I will go to the mountain of 
myrrh and to the hill of incense.’ See also Song of Songs 4:1-5, where the lover praises the various aspects of his 
bride in a series of similes which probably influenced the first few lines of Hildegard’s poem. In the medieval 
commentary tradition, the lover of the Song of Songs was interpreted allegorically as Christ, while the bride was 
seen as the Church. 

5. the sound of many waters: The same image recurs in Hildegard’s writings; it derives from Ezekiel 1:24 and 
Revelation 1:15. 

6. ‘I have eagerly desired: Cf. Luke 22:15, where Jesus says to his disciples: ‘I have eagerly desired to eat this 
Passover with you before I suffer.’ 

7. like a cloud: An echo of Isaiah 60:8: ‘Who are these that fly like clouds’. 

8. make fun of her, singing their songs: The Latin has ‘luder’, ‘to play’, ‘in magna symphonia’, ‘in great 
harmony’. As The Book of Life’s Merits I, 5-6 shows (27), ‘playfulness’ is a fickle, malicious mockery, a vice to 
be remedied and defeated by true ‘shame’. Sabina Flanagan, in Hildegard of Bingen 1098-1179: A Visionary Life 
(London, 1989), p. 137, interprets the passage differently, suggesting that the term ludere refers to games played 
on board ship as Ursula and her companions travelled on their pilgrimage. 

9. necklace of pearls: I.e. Ursula and her companions. 

10. material...: Latin ‘materia’. A common idea in Hildegard’s writings. 


io. The Trials of the Soul (from Scivias) 


1. Where am I in my exile?: The Latin has ‘peregrina’, which means both ‘pilgrim’ and ‘exile’. In the next line the 
soul is described as having ‘the comfort of pilgrims’. Cf. the letter to Bernard of Clairvaux, where Adam is 
described as ‘exsul inperegrinum mundum’, ‘a wanderer in this exile world’. There are many echoes of the 
Bible: Luke 1:79, Wisdom 12:24, II Corinthians 5:4, II Peter 1:13-14. For analogous passages in other texts, 
particularly Gregory the Great’s Moralia in lob, see the edition by Adelgundis Fiihrkotter and Angela Carlevaris, 
Scivias, CCCM 43-433 (Turnhout, 1978), pp. 62-6. 

2. tabernacle: The tent or tabernacle is an image of the body. 

3. gemstones: The significance of gemstones derives from their use in the description of the heavenly Jerusalem 
in Revelation 21:16-21, and from the belief in their healing properties, which Hildegard described in her work 
Physica (22). 

4. the living breath: Refers to the soul. 

5. the north: The location of evil in Hildegard’s allegories and cosmology. The idea may derive from biblical 
passages such as Ezekiel 9:2. 

6. But what misfortune! ... Abomination!: Hildegard uses the Latin ‘heu’ and then the German ‘ach’ (an example 
of Hildegard using German in the middle of her Latin text). Both exclamations have the force ofthe now little- 
used English word ‘alas’. 

7. made me eat with the pigs: A reference to the New Testament parable of the Prodigal Son from Luke 15:11- 
32. For Hildegard’s interpretation of this parable, see Scivias II, 5, 14 (16). 

8. they laid me in a wine-press: The image may derive from Revelation 19:15. See also the letter to Bernard (1), 
where Hildegard says: ‘I am unstable with the movement of the wooden beam of the wine-press in my nature’. 

9. harmonies of music: The ‘harmonies of music’ are part of the ‘sacred sound by which all creation resounds’, a 
basic idea in Hildegard’s philosophy of music. 

10. and so I could not be harmed by them: The illustration for this scene from the Rupertsberg manuscript of 
Scivias shows the kneeling figure of the soul in a square edifice topped with a tower. In the lower left a devil 
attempts without success to enter the door, while at top right two devils try to fire arrows at the soul. In the top 
left of the picture the hand of God appears in a cloud and points towards the soul, bestowing the blessing of 
divine protection upon her. 

11. pride: Hildegard appears to be personifying the vice here, although this is ambiguous in the original Latin. 

12. the cave of pride ofthe ancient serpent: The Latin reads: ‘superbiam antiquae speluncae’, literally ‘the pride 
of the ancient cave’. 

13. ‘Cast away... a new spirit’: Ezekiel 18:31. 


li. Songs for Saint Rupert 


1. Ofelix apparicio. Antiphon for St Rupert: Pudentiana Barth and Immaculata Ritscher (eds), Hildegard von 
Bingen. Lieder (Salzburg, 1969), no. 35 and Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. Symphonia, 2nd edn 
(Ithaca, 1998), no. 46. 

2. O beatissime Ruperte. Antiphon for St Rupert: Barth and Ritscher, Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder, no. 36 and 
Newman, Symphonia, no. 47. Newman suggests the influence of a hymn by Venantius Fortunatus (p. 294). 

3. O Jerusalem. Sequence for St Rupert: Barth and Ritscher, Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder, no. 37 and Newman, 
Symphonia, no. 49. For discussions of this poem see Newman, Symphonia, pp. 295-8 and Peter Dronke, Poetic 
Individuality in the Middle Ages (Oxford, 1970), p. 168. 

4. O Jerusalem, city of gold: Hildegard’s poem alludes in various places to the description of the New Jerusalem, 
‘the city of pure gold’, in Revelation 21. 

5. in the heat of the sun: The feast of St Rupert falls on 15 May, the traditional month in medieval poetry for the 
arrival of summer. 

6. in a true revelation: The idea of a revelation or vision suggests at once a view of the Rupertsberg from the 
valley floor and the vision itself in which Hildegard felt called to move there and found her community. 

7. in Loves embrace: Another textual reading gives the translation ‘in the embrace of chastity’. 

8. soared like clouds in the sky: A recurring image in Hildegard’s writings. Based on Isaiah 60:8. 


12. The Departure of Richardis of Stade 


1. For Heinrich’s order to release Richardis, see 32, Letter 18 to Hildegard. 

2. For other letters connected with the affair, see Lieven Van Acker, Hildegardis Bingensis Epistolarium CCCM 
9i-9ia (Turnhout, 1991 and 1993) and the translation by Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman, The Letters of 
Hildegard of Bingen, 2 vols (Oxford, 1994 and 1998), Letters 4, 64, 13, 13R. Richardis apparently decided to 
return but unfortunately died before she could make the journey. Peter Dronke has written a sensitive study of 
these events in his Women Writers of the Middle Ages. Letter 19 in the standard collection is also interesting in 
its condemnation of Heinrich of Mainz around the time of his deposition from the archbishopric in 1153. 

3. zeal: In Hildegard’s writings, ‘zeal’ often represents the righteous anger of divine justice. 

4. ‘It is good... princes’: Psalm 118:9. 


13 * The First Version of The Play of the Virtues (from Scivias) 

1. Play of the Virtues: An excellent edition and translation of the final version of 1158 is Peter Dronke (ed. and 
trans.), Ordo virtutum, in his Nine Medieval Latin Plays (Cambridge, 1994). 

2. But a report... expensive clothes’: Letter 52 in the standard numbering. See the Latin text edited by Lieven Van 
Acker, Hildegardis Bingensis Epistolarium CCCM 91 (Turnhout, 1991 and 1993) and the translation by Joseph 
L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman, The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, vol. 1 (Oxford, 1994). The ‘first shepherd of 
the Church’ refers to St Paul, and the biblical quotation is from I Timothy 2:9. 

3. King of kings: The phrase occurs in Revelation 19:16. 

4. the profound depths of the wisdom of God: Hildegard draws on a passage of praise from Romans 11:33, which 
begins: ‘Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God...’ 

5. you express love in great measure: As Peter Dronke shows in his edition of The Play of Virtues (1994, line 
182) the sentence echoes Christ’s words about the woman who washed his feet in Luke 7:47: ‘Wherefore I say 
unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much... ’ 

6. kiss of your heart: See Song of Songs 1:2: ‘Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth...’ 

7. hide your face... Creator: Genesis 3:8: ‘Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God 
amongst the trees of the garden.’ 

8. Alas, alas: This speech later became the beginning of scene 3 of The Play of the Virtues, see Dronke’s edition, 
lines 159-60. 

9. the sheep of the Lord has fled this life: An allusion to the parable of the Lost Sheep in Luke 15: 4-7. 

10. the lost drachma: An allusion to the parable of the Lost Coin in Luke 15:8-10: ‘Or again, what woman with 
ten drachmas would not, if she lost one, light a lamp and sweep out the house and search thoroughly till she 
found it? And then, when she had found it, call together her friends and neighbours? “Rejoice with me,” she 
would say, “I have found the drachma I have lost.” In the same way, I tell you, there is rejoicing among the 
angels of God over one repentant sinner.’ 

11. crown... perseverance: Hildegard perhaps has in mind Revelation 2:10, which speaks of people who suffer 
imprisonment by the devil and persecution for ten days, but stay faithful and are rewarded with the ‘crown of 
life’. 

12 . 1 hold a place... marriage chamber: Cf. Scene 2 of Play of the Virtues, ed. Peter Dronke, in Nine Medieval 
Latin Plays, lines 68-75. 

13. awakened you under the apple tree: Song of Songs 8:5. 

14. What is this power... in the heights: See Play of the Virtues, ed. Peter Dronke, in Nine Medieval Latin Plays, 
lines 59-60. 

15. none beside God alone: An echo of Psalm 18:31, or Psalm 17:32 (Vulgate). 

16 . 1 will give them everything: See the temptation of Jesus in Matthew 4:9, where the devil makes a similar 
speech. 

17. THE LAMENT OF THE PENITENT SOUL... VIRTUES : The text now runs in parallel with the later Play of the 
Virtues, scenes 3 and 4, lines 159-97, 209-28, 242-51, with occasional minor changes. 

18. the Good Shepherd: See the parable of the Lost Sheep in Luke 15:4-7 and of the Good Shepherd in John 
10:11-18. 

19. covered with sores: A phrase used to describe the beggar in the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus in Luke 
16:20-6. 

20. all the host of heaven will be glad for you: An echo of the ‘rejoicing in heaven’ at the end of the parable of 
the Lost Sheep in Luke 15:4-7. 

21. to sound forth in harmony: The Latin ‘in symphonia sonare’ recalls the title Symphonia of Hildegard’s 
collection of songs. 


14 . Three Political Letters 


1. robbers lie in wait by night: Cf. the extract ‘The unarmed youth on the road’ in 16 ( Scivias II, 3,16-17). 

2. breastplate: Cf. the ‘breastplate of righteousness’ in Isaiah 59:17 and Ephesians 6:14; the ‘breastplate of faith 
and love’ in I Thessalonians 5:8; the ‘breastplates of fire’ in Revelation 9:17. 

3. the my Stic flower... virginity: Eugenius was originally a Cistercian monk from Clairvaux, a monastic order 
with a strong interest in the contemplative life. 

4. the branch of the Church: I.e. the Papacy. 

5. bear: On a theological level, the bear could be a symbol of the devil, but on a political level, this is likely to be 
a reference to the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, as Joseph L. Baird and Radd K. Ehrman suggest in the notes to 
their translation The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen. 

6. golden shoes: The idea is perhaps biblical; cf. Ephesians 6:15, where shoes are associated with the ‘gospel of 
peace’. 

7. choose... the better part: Luke 10:42. 

8. Henry, Bishop of Liege: For Henry’s question to Hildegard, see 32, Letter 37. 

9. the high mountain: An image with many connotations. The basic idea is the place of salvation, which 
separates light and darkness and divides good from evil. The same image occurs in the vision of the man on the 
mountain in Scivias (25) and in the vision of the cosmic egg in Scivias I, 3 (20). 

10. good and faithful servant: Matthew 25:21, 23. 

11. the mud from the beautiful pearls: Compare Hildegard’s parable of the pearl in Scivias I, 2, 32 (see 
Introduction, III.i). 

12. the power of the strong key: Cf. Matthew 16:19. ‘And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven.’ 

13. God will not leave you: Cf. Psalm 37:28. ‘For the Lord loveth judgement, and forsaketh not his saints.’ 

14. you will see in his light: Cf. Psalm 36:9. 


15. Songs for the Dedication of a Church 


1. Arnold of Brescia: The suggestion is made by Barbara Newman in her Sister of Wisdom and again in her 
Symphonia, 2nd edn (Ithaca, 1998), p. 315. 

2. O virgo ecclesia. Antiphon: Pudentiana Barth and Immaculata Ritscher (eds), Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder 
(Salzburg, 1969), no. 56 and Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. Symphonia, no. 66. The song uses 
traditional imagery of the Church as mother and bride of the King. 

3. banner of the king: I.e. the cross. 

4. Nunc gaudeant. Antiphon: Barth and Ritscher, Hildegard von Bingen. Lieder, no. 57 and Newman, 
Symphonia, no. 67. This song is the last piece in the Dendermonde manuscript. 


i6. Teachings on the Church (from Scivias) 


1. ‘unable and unwilling to be without it’: Arnold of Cologne to Hildegard (Letter 14). For the full text see 32. 
The letter must have been written before 1156, when Rainald of Dassel succeeded Arnold as Archbishop of 
Cologne. 

2. ‘The Lord sent a word... it has lighted upon Israel’: Isaiah 9:8. 

3. ‘Who are these... to their windows?’: Isaiah 60:8. Here Hildegard comments on the relationship of the 
Synagogue to the Church. The final version of The Play of the Virtues, which was issued in 1158, should be 
compared with this passage. The opening section of the prologue gives another view of the same verse, for now 
Hildegard imagines it spoken by the prophets and patriarchs of old rather than the Synagogue: 

PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS: 

Who are these? Who are these that fly as a cloud? 

VIRTUES: 

Oh holy men of Antiquity, why are you amazed at us? 

The Word of God shines bright in the form of a Man 

and so we shine with him, 

forming the limbs of his beautiful body. 

PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS: 

We are the roots and you are the branches, 
the fruits of the living eye 
in which we were the shadow. 

See also Letter II to Hartwig of Bremen, Richardis’s brother (8), which uses the same verse from Isaiah. 

4. The bright radiance... hindrance: The concept of radiance within a gemstone is reminiscent of Hildegard’s 
treatment of gemstones in Physica, although the carbuncle is not included among the stones she discusses 
there. See 22. 

5. baptism: The need to provide teaching on sacraments such as baptism should be seen against the background 
of the Cathar movement, which rejected them. 

6. ways: Cf. the title of the book Scivias, usually interpreted as scito vias, i.e. ‘know the ways.’ 

7. travel on the road: The story recalls biblical parables, but also reflects the dangers of travel in the twelfth 
century. 

8. ‘And on the morrow... I will repay thee’: Luke 10:35, from the parable of the Good Samaritan, who helps a 
traveller wounded by robbers and takes him to an inn to be looked after. 

9. “Well done you good and faithful servant”: Matthew 25:21. 

10. they are built not on rock but on sand: A clear link to the parable from the Sermon on the Mount in 
Matthew 7:24-7, where Jesus tells the story of a wise man who built his house on a foundation of rock while a 
foolish man built his house on sand which fell down in the next storm and flood. 

11. [On oblates]: Oblates were children dedicated to the monastic life, often at a very early age. Despite the high 
regard she had for the monastic vocation, Hildegard approved of oblation only if the children were given an 
opportunity to decide for themselves when old enough to make decisions. For more discussion of Hildegard’s 
imagery in this passage, see Introduction, III.i. 


17. Letter to Elisabeth of Schonau 


1. One important manuscript... Villers in Brabant: The manuscript is now preserved as Codex 9 of the library of 
the Benedictine monastery at Dendermonde in Belgium. 

2. vessel... perfected in it: Cf. II Corinthians 4:7: ‘But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency 
of the power may be of God, and not of us.’ 

3 . Ach! Weh!: Hildegard’s cry of dismay, equivalent to ‘alas’ and ‘woe’, is spoken in German rather than Latin. 

4. become a complete mockery: Latin ‘derideretur’. 

5. ‘Thou art fairer than the children of men’: Psalm 45:2. 

6. sun of justice: Malachi 4:2. 

7. hour of the day: The hours of the day were particularly important in the daily life of the monastery. 

8. soar over the clouds as though they were gods: Isaiah 60:8 blended with Psalm 82:6. The same two biblical 
verses occur in the letter to Hartwig, Archbishop of Bremen (8). 

9. secrets of God: Latin ‘mystica Dei’. 

10. the breastplate of faith : I Thessalonians 5:8. 


18. Gertrud of Stahl eck 


1. bought a pearl: Matthew 13:46. See also Hildegard’s own parable of the pearl discussed in the Introduction at 
II.i. 

2. Gertrud: For Gertrud’s plea for help, see 32, Letter 62 to Hildegard. 

3. ‘the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land’: Song of Songs 2:12. 

4. Therefore rejoice... your heart: Zechariah 2:10 blended with Romans 8:9 or I Corinthians 3:16. 

5. ‘as a lily among thorns’: Song of Songs 2:2. 

6. which the Son of God called thorns: Luke 8:14. A reference to the parable of the Sower. 

7. a wall... pearls: Revelation 21:18-21. 


19. Letter to the Abbess of Bamberg 


1. ‘the first degree of humility is obedience... Christ Leonard J. Doyle (trans.), St Benedict’s Rule for 
Monasteries (Collegeville, MN, 1948), p. 18. 

2. Abbess of Bamberg: For the request from the Abbess to Hildegard, see 32, Letter 61. 


20. The Cosmic Egg (from Scivias) 


1. shaped like an egg: The twelfth century did not believe in a flat earth. The image of the cosmos as an egg is 
not original to Hildegard, but she was clearly fascinated by it. 

2. The horror... stones great and small: As Frances Beer suggests, ‘the vision is ultimately reassuring because it 
reveals how evil can exist and, at the same time as it is part of the creation, be counterbalanced and controlled 
by the forces of good’. See her Women and Mystical Experience in the Middle Ages (Woodbridge, 1992), p. 46. 

3. between the north and the east... a great mountain... towards the east: The great mountain separates good in 
the east from evil in the north. 

4. Through his creation... eternal things: This is Hildegard’s explanation for her allegorical approach, namely 
that the works of creation can be understood not only as phenomena of nature, but also as symbols illustrating 
the history of the faith. 

5. The elements... render them their service: The elements in medieval science are earth, air, fire (i.e. energy) 
and water; all are involved in human physiology, and for Hildegard the human being is seen as being at one with 
the world, as part of a positive view of nature and ecology. 

6. ‘Thou hast crowned him... the works ofthy hands’: From Psalm 8:5-6. 


21. The Cosmos (from Causes and Cures ) 


1. he was always life : See John 1:3-4. 

2. still unformed : Cf. Genesis 1:2: ‘And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of 
the deep.’ 

3. ‘Let there be light’: Genesis 1:3. 

4. the light of the air which we can see: As in the vision of the cosmic egg in Scivias, the air forms a sublunary 
atmosphere, i.e. below the level of the moon’s orbit, while the ether is a higher, superlunary layer above the 
level of the moon. 

5. The fall of Lucifer: Many of the ideas in this passage go back to the biblical verses on the same topic in Isaiah 
14:12-15. A similar set of ideas about Lucifer occurs in The Book of Life’s Merits VI, 14, treated there for their 
moral significance rather than as part of a cosmology, as here. 

6. his envy of God: As Margret Berger points out in her Hildegard of Bingen. On Natural Philosophy and 
Medicine (Cambridge, 1999), p. 24, this phrase could also be interpreted as ‘God’s punitive zeal’. Although such 
a phrase does not fit the context so well, it occurs in other writings of Hildegard, for instance in The Book of 
Life’s Merits. 

7. within every human being all things lie concealed: There are parallels to this idea in Erigena’s Periphyseon 
(755B) and Honorius of Autun’s Clavis physicae (n. 241); see Margret Berger, Hildegard of Bingen, p. 24. 

8. ancient counsel... man: Hildegard’s notion of the ‘ancient counsel’ indicates her belief in the ‘absolute 
predestination of Christ’, the doctrine that Christ would have become man whether or not the Fall had taken 
place. 

9 .fire of judgement... stench and cold: In one of the plagues described in Exodus 9:23-4, hail falls during a 
thunderstorm, and fire runs along the ground. In other words, there is the stench of the fire mingled with the 
cold of the hail. 

10. the wings of the power of God: Cf. Psalm 104:3. 

11. bring their song back into harmony: The Latin reads ‘cantum in symphoniaferent’, which connects this idea 
with Hildegard’s ‘Symphonia’, and the notion of heavenly harmony in her theology of music. 

12. bad humours... illness: According to the humoral physiology of ancient and medieval medicine, the human 
body was made up of four humours in balance. According to the theory in its simplest terms, illness is caused 
either by an imbalance of humours or by bad humours. See Margret Berger, Hildegard of Bingen, p. 15. 

13. the sun’s heat is greater... above it: A good instance of the twelfth-century belief in a spherical earth, with the 
sun orbiting round it. In winter, according to this view, the other side of the earth is warmer in order to keep the 
temperature as a whole in balance. 

14. immoderation: Alack of balance. In the Hildegardian cosmos, everything must moderate itself to the mean. 

15. a loadstone attracting iron to it: The text has ‘achates’, i.e. ‘agate’, the wrong kind of stone. There may have 
been a scribal error, with ‘achates’ being written instead of ‘magnes’; see Margret Berger, Hildegard of Bingen, p. 
29. 

16. The sun precedes... the day... the moon precedes... the night... : The idea is adapted from Genesis 1:16-18: 
‘And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made 
the stars also. And God set them in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth, and to rule over the 
day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.’ See also Psalm 
136:8-9: ‘The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever. The moon and stars to rule by night: for his 
mercy endureth for ever.’ 


22. Gemstones (from Physicci) 


l. [bewitched]... out of their mind: Compare this cure for enchantment with Hildegard’s parable condemning 
the use of the magic arts in Scivias I, 3 (see Introduction at II. 1). 


23. Songs from Symphonia 


1. 0 magne pater. Antiphon: See Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. Symphonia, 2nd edn (Ithaca, 
1998), no. 6. In her useful notes to this song, Newman suggests that it is influenced by Genesis 2:18. 

2. O eterne deus. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 7. The song is based on the idea in Ephesians 1:22-3 that 
Christ is appointed to be head over the Church, which is his body and limbs. This is then combined with an 
image of the first dawn derived from Psalm 110:3. 

3 . Ave Maria. Responsory: Newman, Symphonia, no. 8. 

4. O clarissima mater. Responsory: Newman, Symphonia, no. 9. The ‘star of the sea’ is a traditional image for 
Mary. 

5. O splendidissima gemma. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 10. Adam of St Victor uses the same image of 
the gem in a sequence for Christmas. 

6. Hodie aperuit. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 11. A song in which several very different images (gate, 
woman, dawn, flower) are presented in rapid succession. The idea of the ‘closed gate’ derives from a vision in 
Ezekiel 44:2-3 where the prophet sees a gate shut after the Lord has passed through it and hears that ‘the prince 
himself is the only one who may sit inside the gateway to eat in the presence of the Lord’. The serpent and the 
woman are from the story of Eve in the Garden of Eden. The Dendermonde manuscript begins the song with the 
very specific word ‘hodie’, ‘today’, rather than ‘ nunc ’, ‘now’, of other versions. 

7. Quia ergo femina. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 12. Newman (p. 273) argues that the ‘ ergo ’ shows that 
this is a sequel to the preceding antiphon. The ‘form of a woman’ is both the Platonic idea and also a suggestion 
of weakness, as in the openings of Hildegard’s letters and visionary works. 

8. Cum processit factura. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 13. There is a textual crux in the reading ‘joys of 
life’ Qgaudia vite) rather than ‘joys in you’ (‘g audio in te). 

9. O virga ac diadema. Sequence: Newman, Symphonia, no. 20. From an anecdote in the Canonization Protocol, 
there is evidence to suggest that this sequence was a particular favourite of Hildegard. See 35, paragraph 9.2 of 
the Protocol. 

10. Spiritus sanctus vivificans vita. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 24. 

11. Caritas abundat. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 25. An alternative medieval spelling of the title is 
Karitas habundat. 

12. O gloriosissimi. Antiphon: Newman, Symphonia, no. 29. 

13. O speculum columbe. Antiphon for John the Evangelist: Newman, Symphonia, no. 35. ‘The beloved son of 
the Lamb’ refers to the description ‘one of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved’ in John 13:23. 

14. O dulcis electe. Responsory for John the Evangelist: Newman, Symphonia, no. 36. The phrase translated as 
‘on the greenness of the pastors of the Church’ (Latin ‘in viriditate pigmentariorum’) picks up the Hildegardian 
image of priests as ‘perfumers.’ 

15. O vis aeternitatis. Responsory: Newman, Symphonia, no. 1. The Dendermonde manuscript lacks a few pages 
at the beginning and it is possible that this song was the initial piece. See the journal article by Peter Dronke, 
‘The Composition of Hildegard of Bingen’s Symphonia’, Sacris Erudiri 19 (1969-70), pp. 381-93. 

16. O virtus sapientie: Newman, Symphonia, no. 2. For a discussion of the themes of this song see Introduction 
II.4. The ideas of the sapiential literature of the Apocrypha lie behind this text, particularly Wisdom of Solomon 
8:1, which reads: ‘Wisdom reacheth from one end to another mightily: and sweetly doth she order all things’ and 
Ecclesiasticus 24:5-6, where Wisdom speaks: ‘I alone compassed the circuit of heaven, and walked in the 
bottom of the deep. In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, and in every people and nation, I got a 
possession.’ 


24. Two Christmas Homilies 


1. [ Pitra (ed., homilies Hi and Ilii ]: The Latin text used is from J. B. Pitra (ed.), Analecta sanctae Hildegardis 
opera , in Analecta Sacra, vol. 8 (Montecassino, 1882), pp. 247-9. 

2. For the first mass: This homily is intended to explain the Gospel reading for the first mass on Christmas Day. 

3. ancient counsel: The term used in Hildegard’s theology for the divine plan from before the creation. In giving 
allegorical meanings to the passage, Hildegard follows in the tradition of the commentaries of Bede and Gregory 
the Great, who see Caesar Augustus as representing God; but she adds a cosmological reading which is strongly 
influenced by Neoplatonism. See the detailed analysis in Peter Dronke, ‘Platonic-Christian Allegories in the 
Homilies of Hildegard of Bingen’, in Haijo Jan Westra (ed.), From Athens to Chartres. Neoplatonism and 
Medieval Thought. Studies in Honour of Edouard Teaunea (Leiden, 1992), pp. 281-96. 


25. The Iron Mountain (from Scivias) 


l. ‘He becometh poor... maketh rich’: Proverbs 10:4. 


26. The Man Looking East and South (from The Book of Life’s Merits ) 

1. And I saw...: Hildegard begins her vision appropriately with an opening formula that recalls the writings of 
the biblical prophets; cf. Ezekiel 1:4 or Revelation 5:1, 6, 11. Note also the alliteration of the /v/ consonants in 
the original Latin ‘Et vidi virum’. 

2. stood... turned... looked: Various important aspects of the Latin text do not come over in a modern English 
translation: in this paragraph, there is the end rhyme ‘-bat’, ‘-at’ on the last three verbs, as well as a rhythmical 
balance and cadence: ‘supra abyssum stabat. Et se ad orientem verterat, ita quod et orientem et austrum 
inspiciebat’ . Such acoustic and rhetorical features were calculated to please the medieval reader, who more often 
than not listened to the text being read aloud, or murmured it quietly during the act of reading. Though 
Hildegard’s Latin may not be conventional by the classical standards of the ‘twelfth-century Renaissance’ (and 
her secretary Volmar may in fact have edited and corrected her Latin case-endings and conjugations), 
nevertheless she is clearly in full control of both her content and her medium of its expression. 

3. writing tablet: The Latin tabula is here translated as ‘writing tablet’. Parchment was expensive and paper 
unavailable in this period. The essential note-taking tool since Roman times had been a wooden frame filled 
with wax that was used in conjunction with a metal writing stylus; the writing on the soft wax could be erased 
and the tablet reused. In the opening illustration of the Rupertsberg codex of Scivias (and in many of the 
illustrations of the Lucca manuscript of The Book of Divine Works), the figure of Hildegard is depicted in the act 
of receiving the vision and writing it down on her tablet; only her secretary (Volmar) is seen actually using pen, 
ink and parchment. 

4. knowledge of God: Note here also the characteristic Hildegardian theological term ‘scientia Dei ’, ‘knowledge 
of God’. 

5. one sound: By repetition of the adjective ‘one’, Hildegard rings the changes on the concept of unity: ‘one life... 
one will... one conjunction... one devotion... one sound’ (Latin ‘uno sono’). The latter phrase has been translated 
‘with one sound’, but Hildegard must mean that the ‘host of blessed spirits’ blend their voices to sing in unison, 
a type of musical experience with which she was very familiar from her own songs and settings for the liturgy. 
The notion of the ‘sound’ of all varieties of music occurs in the letter to Bernard of Clairvaux (i). 

6. aforementioned: The frequent adjective ‘aforementioned’ or ‘aforesaid’ (' praedictus 0 is strange to modern 
ears, but serves to orient the medieval audience and prompt their memories as they listen to the reading of the 
text. 

7. trumpet blast... habitations: Hildegard’s vocabulary is heavily influenced by that of Revelation, Ezekiel and 
other apocalyptic and visionary writings. Cf. Revelation 8:12-13. 

8. lion... goat: The words for ‘lion’ and ‘goat’ are leo and capricornus, both signs of the zodiac; they are referred 
to here not necessarily for any astrological meaning but rather for their astronomical and symbolic significance. 
The twelve signs of the zodiac are, it will be recalled, positions within the belt of stars in the night sky against 
which observers can plot the changing position of the sun at the various times of the year. 

9. the ‘misleader’: The Latin for ‘leader’, dux, is derived from the same root form duco, ‘I lead’, as seductor, 
hence the translation ‘misleader’. Hildegard is using etymology to emphasize her point. 

10. a cloud coming from the North: The North is the region of the world associated with the devil; the cloud that 
originates there is described as ‘aridus’, an apt choice of adjective to represent evil and a term which in 
Hilldegard’s works contrasts effectively with her important and frequently encountered notion of ‘viriditas’, or 
‘greenness’, as used for instance in this text in Mercy’s speech against the fourth figure, Hardness of Heart (see 
The Book of Life’s Merits I, 8). 

11. ancient serpent: The ‘serpent’ is of course the devil, as in the account of the Fall in the biblical Genesis. 
‘Ancient Enemy’ (‘ antiquus hostis’) is a traditional term for the devil in medieval literature, with origins in 
patristic commentaries and sermons. 

12. the images... of vices: Here, as also in her exegesis, Hildegard stresses the symbolic nature of her vision; she 
sees symbolic images of vices rather than actual creatures, and among the forms she sees, she chooses to focus 


on seven 



27. The Seven Vices and Virtues (from The Book of Life’s Merits ) 

1. The Wonders of the East: See Richard Stoneman, Legends of Alexander the Great (London, 1994), pp. 20-24. 

2. So why dry up... for shame!: The Latin style is worthy of note in this passage. Though not a poem as such, it 
is remarkable for its strong rhythms and the AB AB AAA rhyme-scheme of its verbs, as well as other internal 
rhymes in -um; note also the alliteration on the [k] sounds as represented by the letters <c> and <q>: 

Et quare arescerem, cum omnem viriditatem habeam? Cur quasi in senili etate viverem, cum in iuventute 
floream? Quare pulchrum visum oculorum in cecitate ducerem? Quod si hocfacerem, erubescerem.’ 

[‘So why dry up when I possess all power of greenness? Why live in senile old age, when I can flourish in 
youthfulness? Why keep in the dark the beautiful vision of the eyes? If I did that, I would blush for shame!’] 

The language seems to echo and reinforce to the semi-aggressive statements of amor seculi. With an 
unmistakable and distinct voice, Love of the World is characterized here as a kind of elemental wild man, 
speaking about positive forces such as ‘greenness’ but misusing them - in Hildegard’s view - for false purposes. 
This feature of a vice using the language of virtue to deceive her audience is also found in Prudentius’s 
Psychomachia. 

3. 1 heard a voice respond to the first figure: The voice of the first virtue, ‘Heavenly Love’. 

4. The second figure... prey: The dog Hildegard depicts here appears to be a kind of coursing-hound or hunting- 
dog. As emerges in the later exegesis which follows the narrative of the vices, the second figure represents 
petulantia, which could be translated as ‘Fickleness’, since the vice is described as chasing after whims and 
deceiving people with fine talk about laughter. The Latin word also has connotations of ‘impudence’, a 
personality feature which also emerges - at least in part - in the characterization of the figure here, for instance 
in the fact that the vice entices people then deals them serious wounds. 

5. 1 heard a voice: As we learn later in the book, the virtue ‘True Discipline’ is speaking here. 

6. The third figure... clothing: The third vice represents ioculatrix, ‘Superficiality’, ‘Jocularity’ or ‘Amusemen’, a 
kind of superficial lack of gravity which the voice from the cloud condemns as ‘idolatry’. As with the other vices 
that employ the vocabulary of virtue to beautify their own speeches and actions, Superficiality attempts to make 
himself attractive to his listeners by evoking the joy of heaven and using this to justify his own behaviour. 

7. the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: Spoken by the virtue ‘Shame’. 

8. The fourth figure... motionless: The fourth image, the cloud of smoke, represents obduratio, Hardness of 
Heart’. 

9. So why should I labour... to pieces?: Note the rhyming prose in the original Latin (lines 194-5): ‘Quare ergo 
causa ullius laborarem, et me dilacerarem?’ (‘Why should I labour for any good cause? Why tear myself to 
pieces?’). 

10. the voice from the aforementioned storm-cloud: The fourth virtue is ‘True Mercy’. 

11. the stone presents its moisture: The idea of ‘perspiration’ in stones is explicable as part of the medieval 
notion of the four elements, namely: earth (i.e. solid matter), air (gases), fire (energy) and water (moisture), 
each of which is found in varying quantities in every created thing. See The Book of Gemstones in 22. 

12. The fifth figure... whole head: The fifth vice is ignavia, ‘Lack of Spirit’. This figure with a large ear covering 
all its head is reminiscent of creatures with grotesquely exaggerated limbs in the Marvels of the East tradition. 

13. the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: The fifth virtue is ‘Divine Victory’. 

14. The sixth figure... burning brands: The sixth vice, ira, ‘Anger’, has flames issuing from its mouth like the 
monsters of legend, while the firebrands recall depictions of Anger in the traditional illustrations of vices in 
manuscripts of Prudentius’s Psychomachia. 

15. the response ofthe voice from the storm-cloud: The sixth virtue is ‘Divine Patience’; patience is the 
traditional remedy for anger in the psychomachia tradition. 

16. The seventh figure... quite naked: The seventh vice is inepta letitia, ‘Foolish Joy’. Similarities will be noted 


between the individual members of this group of seven sins; here in particular Foolish Joy recalls the first, 
second and third figures of vice, yet also follows on from the preceding figure ‘Anger’, as Hildegard explains 
later, ‘because when a person shows joy after being angry, he humiliates his enemies, who feel the insults 
heaped upon them all the more strongly when they see him happy’. 

17. the response of the voice from the storm-cloud: The seventh virtue is ‘Desire for God’. 


28. The Voice from Heaven (from The Book of Life’s Merits ) 


1. black schism : Possibly a reference to the eighteen-year schism between Pope Alexander III and Emperor 
Frederick Barbarossa which began in 1159, shortly after Hildegard had started work on The Book of Life’s Merits. 

2. man... lion... ox... eagle... four: The four images of the man, the lion, the bull and the eagle from Ezekiel 1:10 
were traditionally interpreted as symbols of the four evangelists, for instance in the iconography of the 
illuminated gospel books of the early Middle Ages. In Hildegard these become theological symbols, each using 
traditional animal imagery to illustrate aspects of God: his goodness, power, sacrifice, and knowledge. 

3. The work of the activity of God. ..from God: The same idea is basic to the third book of the trilogy, The Book 
of Divine Works. 

4. For he alone knows all things... grace: Hildegard has a strong sense of immanence, that God is present and 
actively at work in the world. 

5. ‘The Lord... his enemies’: Isaiah 42:13. Hildegard has taken the image of the ‘mighty man’ from Isaiah and 
adapted it to her own vision, as she explains in the following paragraphs. 

6. Before the ancient days... destruction: A contrast is made between the heights of the Lord’s power - as life to 
the living - and the carelessness of Pride ‘who attempts to climb before he has seen the ladder’. Note also in this 
passage the key concept of the ‘ancient counsel’ or plan that has been prepared beforehand against the forces of 
pride. 

7. But he prepared his quiver and arrows... Man of war: This is the traditional patristic image of the devil as an 
archer (Psalm 11:2 in the Authorized Version), here attempting to have his revenge for the fall from heaven. 

8. He then took up ‘the Word... never cease: The idea that ‘the Lord shall go forth as a mighty man’ is linked now 
to the incarnation of Christ, when ‘the Word... became flesh’ (John 1:14). The battle with the enemy is seen as 
one of active good against idle and inactive evil, and the text becomes a prophecy of the apocalypse. 

9. The Man is of such stature’... and no end: At this point Hildegard returns to the details of the opening vision 
and explains them step by step, beginning with some reflections for the reader on how the eternity of God is to 
be understood. 

10. God is eternal... a flaming fire in judgement: By a series of associated images Hildegard connects eternity 
with fire, God’s power, rational thought, the senses, and judgement. A key influence is Psalm 104, the hymn to 
creation and renewal from the Psalms, especially the verse ‘Who maketh... his ministers a flaming fire’ (Psalm 
104: 4; Authorized Version). 

11. Before the time of the Law... any other kind of law: The figure of the Man in the original vision is now 
employed allegorically for a discussion of salvation history and the purgation of sin. In the allegory, the 
shoulders of the man represent the law of Moses, as in the biblical verse Hildegard is about to discuss in 
paragraph 26, ‘the government shall be upon his shoulder’ (Isaiah 9:6). 

12. on the shoulder of his strength: Hildegard’s style here is extremely allusive and associative, but the main 
message seems to be that the shoulder is a symbol for the strength and justice of Christ. 

13. without the venomous seed of a man: The doctrine of the ‘venomous seed of a man’ contrasts with more 
positive views of sexuality, for instance in Hildegard’s Causes and Cures. 

14. the Old Law was the sound and shadow of the word... Christ , then appeared: Hildegard shows some 
acquaintance with reflections on language, in particular the difference between a word as an abstract meaning- 
bearing entity and the spoken word as a sound perceived by the senses and subject to the limitations of time and 
space. Hildegard’s source, however, remains unclear, for unlike many early medieval writers she does not cite 
whole passages from her authorities. Ultimately, the influence of Augustine is apparent, for instance his 
musings on time, speech, memory and the Word in Books X and XI of his Confessions. In a relevant passage in 
Book XI, chapter 6 translated by Pine-Coffin (Harmondsworth, 1961, p. 258), Augustine addresses God as 
follows: 

But how did you speak? Did you speak as you did when your voice was heard in the clouds saying: This is my 


beloved Son? At that time your voice sounded and then ceased. It was speech with a beginning and an end. Each 
syllable could be heard and then died away, the second following after the first and the third after the second, 
and so on in sequence until the last syllable followed all the rest and then gave place to silence. [...] These 
words, which you had caused to sound in time, were reported by the bodily ear of the hearer to the mind, which 
has intelligence and inward hearing responsive to your eternal Word. 

15. the sound and the word came together... in agreement: By contrast to the Old Testament, under the New 
Law the sound and meaning word become inseparable, a theme touched on further below. 

16. the Old Law was in shadow... anything different: An analogy is made between the shadowy existence in the 
Law of the Old Testament period and the shadowy existence of the souls of the saints awaiting the resurrection 
of the body. 

17. From his knees to the calves of his legs he is in the earth.’... their sustenance: Hildegard draws an analogy 
between the supporting knees of the cosmic Man and the sustaining strength of the earth, both of which can 
flex under pressure and then return afterwards to their ‘rightful condition’. 

18. So also the Church... endure invincible: Having set up the image of the flexible knees, Hildegard now applies 
it on a prophetic level to the ‘New Nation’, that is the Church, which will come under pressure during the time 
of the Antichrist and yet in the end endure invincible. 

19. She will stand firmly on her feet: Just as the cosmic Man ‘rests in his mysteries’, so the Church in the last 
days will ‘stand firmly on her feet’. 

20. ‘Who hath measured... depth of the abyss?’ : From the Old Testament Apocrypha - the book of wisdom 
literature known as Ecclesiasticus (or Sirach) 1:3. 

21. It was Wisdom... penetrated the abyss: In Ecclesiasticus 24:5, Wisdom speaks: ‘I alone compassed the 
circuit of heaven, and walked in the bottom of the deep.’ 

22. your ways are true and just: See Revelation 16:7. In the passage following, the biblical quotation is 
expanded into a long prayer spoken on behalf of erring humanity who need to realize the truth that the Lord’s 
‘judgements are true and just’. 

23. the mountain, which is the knowledge of God: The image of the mountain as the knowledge of God can be 
compared with the mountain in Scivias 1 , 1 (25), or in the description of the cosmic egg in Scivias I, 3 (20), or in 
the letters to Henry, Bishop of Liege or Prior Dimo (14, 30). 

24. ‘He heard hidden words, which it is not permitted for anyone to speak’: II Corinthians 12:4. Hildegard at no 
point states clearly that the man ‘caught up into paradise’ in this verse refers to the Apostle Paul, which is the 
traditional view of this passage. Instead, Hildegard expands on the notion of ‘hidden words’ that are revealed to 
visionaries, as in her own case, and it is tempting to relate this passage to her short treatise on the ‘unknown 
language’ which she wrote in the 1150s before starting on The Book of Life’s Merits. 


29. The Unknown Language 

1. examples... of interest: Taken from Jean-Baptiste Pitra (ed.), Sanctae Hildegardis opera, in Analecta sacra, 
vol. 8 (Montecassino, 1882), p. 497. 

2. word formation: The root aieg seems to be important, as do the endings -nz and -iz. Other examples not 
listed above suggest influence from Latin or German, e.g. vanix, ‘woman’, perhaps from Latin vanitas, ‘vanity’, 
falschin, ‘poet’, perhaps from Middle High German valsch, ‘false’, and sonziz, ‘apostle’, possibly related to the 
sonus or ‘sacred sound’ to which Hildegard frequently referred. For more information on Hildegard’s language, 
see Marie-Louise Portmann and Alois Odermatt (eds), Worterbuch der unbekannten Sprache [Dictionary of the 
Unknown Language] (Basel, 1986). 

3. See note 24 to 28. 

4. The original text... English translation: Pudentiana Barth and Immaculata Ritscher (eds), Hildegard von 
Bingen. Lieder (Salzburg, 1969), no. 67 and Barbara Newman (ed.), Hildegard of Bingen. Symphonia, 2nd edn 
(Ithaca, 1998), no. 68; for a discussion of the song, see Newman, Symphonia, pp. 316-17. 


30. Allegorical Letters 


1. Abbess ofAltena...: See 32, Letter 49 for the abbess’s bid for friendship. 

2. abbess and teacher : Latin ‘magistra’. 

3. ‘Behold, the lion... prevailed ’: Revelation 5:5. 

4. into the abyss: II Peter 2:4. 

5. With rending teeth he drives all injustice from him: Cf. Psalm 34:16 (Vulgate) or Psalm 35:16 (Authorized 
Version). 

6. Eberhard, Archbishop of Salzburg...: See Eberhard’s letter to Hildegard (32, Letter 25). 

7. ‘You are gods... sons of the most High’: Psalm 81:6 (Vulgate) or 82:6 (Authorized Version); the verse is 
referred to by Jesus in John 10:34. 

8. the circuit of the heaven: Ecclesiasticus 24:5. 

9. Love is my matter: Hildegard’s idea of creation from ‘matter’, or material, includes the idea of the maternal, 
i.e. the image of the mother bearing a child. 

10. he who is: Exodus 3:14. 

11. Adam ofEbrach... : For Adam’s letter to Hildegard, see 32, Letter 85. 

12. she had in her right hand... moon: Cf. Revelation 1:16. 

13. 1 begot thee: Psalm 109:3 (Vulgate). This differs from the text of the Authorized Version (Psalm 110:3). 

14. Love: In the sense of charity, Latin caritas. 

15. base matter: Latin ‘materia’, with connotations of mater, ‘mother’. 

16. ‘Let it be done’: Latin fiat’, as in Genesis 1:3, ‘Let there be light’. 

17. The Lord said... at my right hand’: Psalm 109:1 (Vulgate) or 110:1 (Authorized Version). 

18. the ancient of days: Daniel 7:9. 

19. ‘Increase... fill the earth’: Genesis 1:28. 

20. Humility redeemed him: There is a strong association between the earth, humility and humanity in writings 
on this theme. 

21. the eye of love... heavenly love: Latin ‘caritas’ and ‘amor’ respectively. 

22. Love and Humility: The text has Love and Obedience knocking at the door, but this may be an error. The 
allegory makes better sense if the knight Obedience is sitting in the house, and the two maidens Love and 
Humility are at the door. 

23. you will never be... confounded: Latin: ‘nee morte morieris’. 


31. A Vision of Love (from The Book of Divine Works ) 


l. ‘Fiat, let there be...’: From the Vulgate text of Genesis 1:3. 


32. Queries and Requests: Selected Letters to Hildegard 


1. correspondents: Further information on the recipients and personalities involved is given in the Glossary. For 
convenience, the letters selected have been numbered according to the edition by Lieven Van Acker, Hildegardis 
Bingensis Epistolarium CCCM 9i-9ia (Turnhout,i99i and 1993) and the translation by Joseph L. Baird and 
Radd K. Ehrman, The Letters of Hildegard of Bingen, 2 vols (Oxford, 1994 and 1998). Van Acker’s arrangement 
follows the hierarchical ranking of the letters as preserved in the major manuscript collection, rather than the 
order in which they were written. Since many of the letters cannot be dated precisely, the chronological order 
attempted in this selection should be seen as only approximate. 

2. Bernard of Clairvaux...: For Hildegard’s request for support, see 1, Letter 1. 

3. ‘God opposes... the humble’: Proverbs 3:34, quoted in James 4:6 and I Peter 5:5. 

4. Odo ofSoissons...: For Hildegard’s reply, see 4. 

5. ‘The king... chamber’: Song of Songs 1:4. 

6. my secret to myself: Isaiah 24:16 (Vulgate text). 

7. King Hezekiah... angered the Lord: See Isaiah 39:2-8. Odo is using the example of Hezekiah to warn 
Hildegard against the dangers of revealing spiritual treasures to opponents. 

8. place certain things under a seal: A book is placed under a seal in Revelation 5:1. The idea is common also in 
Hildegard’s writings. 

9. ‘the woman thatfeareth the Lord, she shall be praise’: Proverbs 31:30. 

10. the melodies of a new song: The allusion to Hildegard’s compositions shows that she was already writing 
songs by the late 1140s. 

11. many scholars argue that God is not identical with both paternity and divinity: This was one of the theses 
of Gilbert Porreta, Bishop of Poitiers. 

12. Heinrich, Archbishop of Mainz...: For Hildegard’s aggressive reply, see 12. 

13. a sister... in your monastery: The reference is to Richardis of Stade. 

14. Henry, Bishop of Liege...: For Hildegard’s reply, see 14. 

15. Arnold, Archbishop of Cologne...: Hildegard’s short reply is quoted in the introduction to 16. 

16. the book... interference: A reference to Scivias, probably the most widely known of Hildegard’s books during 
her lifetime. 

17. Gertrud ( ofStahleck )...: Hildegard sent an encouraging response; see 18. 

18. ‘things... heart of man’: I Corinthians 2:9. 

19. the wine of sorrow : I follow here the translation by Baird and Ehrman, in The Letters, vol. 1. 

20. the one whom I desire: Song of Songs 2:3: ‘As the apple tree among the trees of the woods, so is my beloved 
among the sons. I sat down under his shadow whom I desired: and his fruit was sweet to my palate.’ 

21 .Abbess of... Bamberg...: For Hildegard’s reply see 19. 

22. An Abbess ofAltena...: Hildegard’s response is allegorical and does not quite match the personal tone of the 
abbess’s letter; see 30, Letter 49R. 

23. sitting with Mary at the feet of Christ: Probably a reference to Mary Magdalene (see Matthew 27:61); the 
imagery of Christ the beloved derives from interpretations of the Song of Songs. 

24. secret chamber of your heart: Perhaps a reference to the story of Judith in the Old Testament Apocrypha. 
See, for instance, Judith 8:5 in the Jerusalem Bible. 

25. tasted... sweet: Psalm 34:8. 

26. face to face: I Corinthians 13:12. 

27. Eberhard, Archbishop of Salzburg...: For the allegory Hildegard wrote in response, see 30, Letter 25R. 

28. you will enter... heavenly bridegroom: An allusion to the parable of the Five Wise Virgins, who bought oil 
for their lamps so that when the bridegroom came they were ready, and ‘they went in with him to the marriage’, 


while the five foolish virgins remained outside, with no oil for their lamps. See Matthew 25:1-12. 

29. the Emperor’s court at Mainz: Emperor Frederick Barbarossa held royal audiences at various intervals in 
different locations throughout the empire. This occasion, in 1163, was particularly important for Hildegard 
because she received an imperial deed of protection for the Rupertsberg convent. Eberhard’s name appears 
among the many names of witnesses to the deed, which also include Archbishop Conrad of Mainz, Archbishop 
Eberhard of Bamberg and Bishop Henry of Liege. 

30. under a seal: Eberhard wants a sealed letter in reply for extra security. He himself was in a difficult political 
situation: as a friend of the Emperor, he nevertheless supported Pope Alexander III against the antipope Victor 
IV. 

31 .Abbot Adam...: Adam’s letter provoked a fascinating letter in reply; see 30, Letter 85R/A. 

32. rejoiced with a great joy : The wording is biblical. Cf. Matthew 2:10: ‘And seeing the great star, they rejoiced 
with exceeding great joy.’ 

33. allow your voice to be heard in our land: A reference to Hildegard’s first preaching tour, between 1158 and 
1161. 


33* From The Life ofHildegard, Book 2 , by Theoderich of Echternach 

1. She revealed certain things about the nature of the human being... such things: A reference to the work now 
known as two separate books: Causes and Cures and Physica. 

2. in marvellous harmony : The Latin word used is ‘symphonia’, the same word occurring in the title of 
Hildegard’s collected songs, The Symphony of the Harmony of Celestial Relations. 

3. other typological expositions: This refers to Hildegard’s commentaries on the Creed and the Benedictine 
Rule. 

4. key of David... no man openeth ’: Revelation 3:7. 

5. ‘the king hath brought her to his storerooms’: See Song of Songs 1:3 (Douay-Rheims translation following the 
Latin Vulgate) or Song of Songs 1:4 (Authorized Version). 

6. ‘inebriated with the plenty of his house’: See Psalm 35:9 (Vulgate), or the slightly different text in the 
Authorized Version (Psalm 36:8). 

7. she will conceive... over the earth: Cf. Isaiah 26:18. 

8. as her fellow initiate: Here Volmar, Hildegard’s secretary, is referred to as a ‘symmista’, i.e. someone else who 
had been initiated into heavenly mysteries. 

9. he who has the file... human ears’: Volmar’s work as a scribe is here described with the conventional image of 
the grammarian as a craftsman who files down the rough metal and so polishes the style of the Latin. 

10. ‘My beloved... of my being’: Song of Songs 5:4 (cf. the texts of the Vulgate and Jerusalem Bible). This same 
text was also used by Rupert of Deutz to justify his own visionary experiences. 

11. 1 was offered to God for the spiritual life: Hildegard joins Jutta, either at her household or at the anchorage. 


34* Gebeno of Eberbach: The Pentachronon 


1. Gebeno... Hildegard’s letter: Since the Pentachronon is unpublished, information on Gebeno’s selections is 
printed only in Jean Baptiste Pitra (ed.) , Analecta sanctae Hildegardis opera spicilegio solesme parata, in the 
series Analecta sacra, vol. VIII (Montecassino, 1882), pp. 483-8. 

2. [Conrad III to Hildegard J: The texts of this letter and Hildegard’s reply are printed in PL 97, 185A-186B. 

3. my son... succeed me: In the end Conrad nominated his nephew, Frederick Barbarossa, to succeed him in 
1152. 


35* From the Canonization Protocol 


l .Abbess of Rupertsberg: The official title of the abbess is magistra (mistress), as it was in Hildegard’s time. 

2. Seguwize... Hildegard: The story of how Seguwize was eventually healed of demon possession is told in the 
Life of Hildegard, Book 3, 20-22. 

3. tertian or quartan fever: A tertian is the kind of fever that recurs every other day (by inclusive reckoning 
every third day, hence the name tertian). A quartan is a fever that recurs, by inclusive reckoning, every fourth 
day. For information on medieval views of the causes of such fevers, see the introduction to Margret Berger, 
Hildegard of Bingen. On Natural Philosophy and Medicine (Cambridge, 1999), p. 16. 

4. The more reasonable part: The Latin has ‘sanior’, here translated ‘more reasonable’. 

5. O virga ac diadema : ‘O branch and diadem’, one of Hildegard’s sequences dedicated to Saint Mary. 

6. all the masters... theology: A reference to the lecturers of the schools of Paris, which at this stage were 
developing into the medieval university of Paris. 

7. twelve books: The twelve ‘books’ could be the three parts of Scivias, the six parts of The Book of Life’s Merits 
and the three of The Book of Divine Works. 

8. William of Auxerre... : The mention of William of Auxerre, who became a master at Paris in about 1210 and 
died in Rome perhaps in 1231, helps to give an approximate date to the events recorded here. 


GLOSSARY 


ABELARD, PETER (c. 1079-c. 1142) Brilliant and controversial logician and theologian of twelfth-century 
France, the celebrated lover of Heloise and enemy of Bernard of Clairvaux. 

ADAM OF EBRACH First Abbot of the Cistercian monastery of Ebrach (founded in 1127), between Kitzingen 
and Bamberg in the Main region. Originally a monk at Morimond, Adam had assisted his friend Bernard of 
Clairvaux in preaching the Crusade in 1147, and in 1152 he was sent by Barbarossa as an envoy to Pope 
Eugenius III. He met Hildegard during her first preaching tour, between 1158 and 1161. 

ADELHEID OF GANDERSHEIM (d. 1184) Nun and abbess. Brought up in the same household as her young 
aunt Richardis of Stade, she also joined Hildegard’s convent but left in 1151 to become Abbess of 
Gandersheim in eastern Germany. In 1160 she also acquired a similar position as head of a community of 
canons at Quedlinburg. 

/EL RED OF RIEVAULX (1109-67) Cistercian abbot from Rievaulx, North Yorkshire. Author of The Mirror of 
Love (1142-3), written at the instigation of Bernard of Clairvaux, and On Spiritual Friendship (1150-65), a 
classic expression of monastic friendship. 

ALAN OF LILLE (d. 1203) Poet and theologian. Probably studied and taught at Paris, c. 1150-c. 1185. Influenced 
by Gilbert Porreta. Among his literary works are the Plaint of Nature in prose and verse, in which the main 
character is the personified figure of Nature, and the allegorical poem Anticlaudianus (1182-3). 

ALCUIN OF YORK (c. 740-804) A major scholar, teacher and writer at the court of Charlemagne. In his biblical 
scholarship, he promoted the Vulgate text, which came to be accepted as the standard version of the Bible in 
the medieval West. 

ALEXANDER III, POPE (d. 1181) Orlando (or Rolandus) Bandinelli. Papal chancellor under Eugenius III, he 
was elected Pope in 1159 on the death of Hadrian IV, and immediately faced a rival antipope Victor IV 
elected by the supporters of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Throughout the long schism with the Emperor, 
Alexander III lived mostly in France, and nurtured contacts with Henry II, King of England, whom he forced 
to do penance after the murder of Thomas Becket. Alexander presided over the Third Lateran Council in 
1179, which gave the exclusive right of electing a pope to a two-thirds majority of the cardinals. 

AMBROSIUS AUTPERTUS (d. 784) Writer and theologian. Born in Provence, he became a monk of St Vincent 
near Capua in Italy c. 740 and was elected Abbot in 777. His main work is a commentary on Revelation, but 
he also wrote the Conflict of the Vices and Virtues, which appears to have influenced Hildegard’s Book of 
Life’s Merits. 

ARNOLD OF BRESCIA A native of Brescia in Lombardy and a fiery reformer. Unlike Hildegard, he encouraged 
lay people not to accept the sacraments from priests guilty of simony; he also preached the disendowment of 
pope and clergy. As supporter and then leader of the Roman Senate, he drove out Pope Eugenius III from 
Rome and was excommunicated in 1148. In 1152 the Senate lost control of Rome, and Arnold was finally 
overthrown and hanged in 1155 during the pontificate of Pope Hadrian IV. 

ARNOLD, ARCHBISHOP OF COLOGNE Archbishop of Cologne before Rainald of Dassel, Arnold wrote to 
Hildegard requesting a copy of Scivias (see 32 and, for Hildegard’s response, 16). 

ARNOLD, ARCHBISHOP OF MAINZ (Served as Archbishop 1153-60) Well regarded by King Conrad III, he was 
elected Archbishop of Mainz at Frederick Barbarossa’s instigation. In 1158 Arnold issued two charters 
confirming the agreement Hildegard had made with the Disibodenberg to secure the property rights and 
income of the Rupertsberg and to arrange for priests to take services and perform other clerical duties for 
the community. During his period in office, he came into conflict with the Count Palatine Hermann of 
Stahleck and also had problems raising the tribute for Barbarossa’s Italian expeditions. On 1 November 1159 
he placed the whole city of Mainz under excommunication before joining Barbarossa in Italy. On his return 
the dispute worsened and Arnold was killed during the violence that followed. 



AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO (354-430) St Augustine, Bishop of Hippo in North Africa, is probably the most famous 
of the four ‘Doctors of the Church’. His influence was enormous, and his numerous works include 
Confessions, On the Trinity, Christian Teaching, The Catechism of the Unlearned as well as numerous other 
treatises and sermons. 

BASSUM Monastery in the diocese of Bremen where Richardis of Stade was appointed Abbess. 

BENEDICTINE ORDER The traditional Western European monasticism, founded by St Benedict of Nursia (c. 
480-c. 550); Benedict’s Rule for Monasteries regulated the Divine Office (Latin opus Dei), the daily pattern 
of worship and prayer divided into eight ‘offices’: matins at the end of the night, lauds at daybreak, prime, 
terce, sext and none during the day, vespers in the evening, and compline at sunset. The offices during the 
hours of daylight were interspersed with periods of work and reading. Hildegard wrote a commentary on the 
Rule, probably in the period 1151-8. 

BERNARD OF CHARTRES (c. 1080-c. 1130) From c. 1114, master of the famous cathedral school of Chartres. 
According to one of his pupils, John of Salisbury, Bernard revered the arts and knowledge of ancient Greece 
and Rome which he saw as far exceeding that of his own day; for Bernard, his contemporaries were ‘dwarfs, 
standing on the shoulders of the giants’. 

BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX (1090-1153) Born in Burgundy, Bernard of Fontaines became famous under the 
name of the Cistercian monastery he founded in 1115 and ruled as abbot until his death in 1153. The most 
important Cistercian of his time, he wrote numerous works, including letters, sermons, satirical works and 
spiritual writings. An ascetic in his early years, Bernard became more politically involved after 1128, 
intervening in disputes between important figures in the Church. In 1140 his influence led to the 
condemnation of the teachings of Peter Abelard at the Council of Sens. After the election in 1145 of Pope 
Eugenius III, a Cistercian from Clairvaux, Bernard undertook preaching tours against heresy in the 
Languedoc, Bordeaux, Toulouse and Albis. From 1146 to 1147 he preached the Second Crusade, which 
subsequently failed in 1149. In this period he secured the acceptance of Hildegard’s writings at the Synod of 
Trier (1147-8). 

BERNARD SILVESTER Bernardus Silvestris, poet and philosopher. Of the same generation as William of 
Conches, Gilbert of Poitiers and John of Salisbury. Little is known of his life apart from reminiscences of 
contemporaries. He taught at Tours, probably between 1130 and 1140, and had some connections with 
Chartres. His major work is the allegorical poem Cosmographia. 

BESANQON A papal embassy from Hadrian IV met Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and his chancellor, Rainald 
of Dassel, at the Diet (Assembly) of Besangon in October 1157, and a dispute arose over whether the emperor 
should receive the imperial crown as a benefice (Latin beneficium) from the pope. Part of the problem may 
have been Rainald’s inflammatory translation of the ambiguous term benficium as ‘fief rather than as ‘gift’. 
The row provoked the emperor into asserting his rights by sacred Roman law to the free crown of the ‘holy 
empire’, and it contributed to the later schism between emperor and pope from 1159 to 1177. 

BOETHIUS (c. 480-C.524) The Roman statesman and Neoplatonist philosopher; author of works on the Greek 
science of Euclid, Porphyry and Aristotle, as well as his prison writing The Consolation of Philosophy, which 
was widely read in the Middle Ages. In his theological writings, the Opuscula sacra, he wrote on the Trinity 
and the Person of Christ. 

BONIFACE, SAINT (c. 675-754) Wynfrith of Wessex, England, later known as Saint Boniface. The ‘Apostle of 
Germany’, he was martyred in 754 at Dokkum in Frisia. In c. 746 he had become the first Archbishop of 
Mainz. Since her convent lay within the diocese of Mainz, Hildegard held the memory of Boniface in 
particular respect and wrote an antiphon in his honour. 

BOOK OF DIVINE WORKS Latin title Liber divinorum operum. Alternative title De operatione Dei (‘On the 
Activity of God’). Hildegard’s third large-scale visionary work, written in the period 1163-73/4 and divided 
into three parts covering the position of the human being, the earth and the cosmos in the divine scheme of 
things. There are four manuscripts: (1) the Gent manuscript (Gent, University Library, cod. 241), important 
because it is evidently the original copy dictated or written by Hildegard and then heavily corrected; (2) 



Troyes, Bibliotheque municipale, cod. 683, originally from Clairvaux; (3) the Riesenkodex; and (4) the Lucca 
manuscript, important for its illustrations. 

BOOK OF LIFE’S MERITS Latin title Liber vitae meritorum, sometimes translated as ‘The Book of the Rewards 
of Life’. The second of Hildegard’s three visionary works, written in 1158-63, it centres on the divine figure 
of a Man looking out to different parts of the world. Especially concerned with ethical issues, five of its six 
parts or ‘books’ consist of dialogue-contests between 35 opposing pairs of vices and virtues, arranged in 
groups of five, seven or eight pairs. The theme of the sixth book is eschatology and the joys of heaven. Four 
of the six manuscripts are from the twelfth century and are associated with monasteries known to 
Hildegard: (1) the Dendermonde codex from the Abbey of Villers; (2) the Berlin manuscript (Berlin, SB 
Preuss. Kulturerbes cod. lat. theol. 727) associated with St Jacob in Mainz; (3) the Trier manuscript (Trier, 
Seminarbibliothek cod. 68) from the monastery of St Eucharius in Trier; and (4) the Riesenkodex from the 
Rupertsberg. 

CAESARIUS OF ARLES (c. 470-542) Writer and churchman. Archbishop of Arles from 502. His writings, 
particularly his sermons directed at a popular audience, were influential in the early medieval period. 

CALLISTUS III Abbot John of Struma. The third ‘antipope’ of Frederick Barbarossa’s reign; elected in 1168 as 
successor to Paschal III. 

CANONS REGULAR or AUGUSTINIAN CANONS The Rule of St Augustine, a text attributed to Augustine of 
Hippo, became popular during the pontificate of Gregory VII, and led to the foundation of communities of 
clerks known as canons regular, or Augustinian canons, in the eleventh century. 

CANOSSAThe castle near Reggio/Emilia in Northern Italy where Henry IV, King of Germany, did penance 
before Pope Gregory VII in February 1076. The event is emblematic of the strained relationship between 
emperor and pope which was to dog the political life of the twelfth century. 

CATHARISM A religious movement that broke away from the Catholic Church and was condemned as heretical. 
The Cathars, i.e. the ‘pure ones’ (known in France as Albigensians), had extreme dualist beliefs, teaching 
that the matter of the world and the human body were evil and diametrically opposed to the life of the soul. 
While their clergy (‘the perfect’) were very ascetic, their laity (the ‘believers’) were reported to be extremely 
lax. The movement spread to Germany from the 1140s. Despite some unconscious dualist tendencies, 
Hildegard’s theology was based on the idea of the human being as a whole unity and as the centre of a good 
creation, a microcosm of the wider macrocosm. Her sermon in Cologne during her third preaching tour 
(1161-3) specifically attacked the Cathars. 

CAUSE ET CURE Usually translated as ‘Causes and Cures’, although the Latin cura also means ‘care’. 
Alternative title Liber compositae medicine (‘The Book of Composite Medicine’). Hildegard’s study of 
human health, written 1151-8. Together with Physica, it may have originally formed a single work known as 
Liber subtilitatum diversarum naturarum creaturarum (‘The Book of the Subtleties of the Diverse Natures 
of Creatures’). The work survives in one thirteenth -century manuscript (Copenhagen, Kgl. Bibl., cod. 90b) 
and in a fragment of a manuscript (Berlin, SB Preuss. Kulturerbes, cod. lat. Qu. 674). 

CHARLEMAGNE (c. 742-814) Charles the Great, King of Germany 768-814, whose coronation as Emperor in 
800 set a stamp on the politics of medieval Europe. In 1165 he was canonized as a saint at the instigation of 
one of his powerful successors, Frederick Barbarossa, who sought thereby to gain prestige for his own 
position as Holy Roman Emperor. 

CHRISTIAN DE BUCH After the papal supporter Archbishop Conrad of Mainz fled the city before the imperial 
forces, Frederick Barbarossa appointed Christian de Buch as Archbishop of Mainz. Christian was also the 
imperial chancellor and general of Frederick’s forces. He helped effect a reconciliation between the Emperor 
and the Pope at Venice in 1177 and was away in Rome when the prelates of Mainz imposed the interdict on 
the Rupertsberg in 1179. Hildegard eventually wrote to Christian asking him to lift the ban, and Christian 
agreed, placing the matter in the hands of Philip, Archbishop of Cologne, the neighbouring diocese. But at 
the intervention of one of the Mainz prelates, the interdict was reinstated. Only after Hildegard had appealed 
to Christian in a second letter was the ban lifted; Christian sent Hildegard a personal apology. 



CISTERCIAN ORDER A twelfth-century reform movement based on Benedictine monasticism, the Cistercians 
questioned both the elaborate liturgy and the close connections with the feudal order which had developed 
in the earlier Cluniac movement. The order emphasized meditative reading and manual labour as important 
features of a monk’s daily life, but also inspired literary talent, particularly in the works of Bernard of 
Clairvaux and ZElred of Rievaulx. 

CITEAUX (Latin name: Cistercium) Monastery near Dijon in France, founded by Robert of Molesmes in 1098; 
the mother house of the Cistercian movement, efficiently organized by its abbot Stephen Harding from 1108. 

CLUNIACS An important movement for the reform of the Benedictine monastic order in the eleventh and early 
twelfth centuries. The Cluniacs advocated a close adherence to the spirit of the Benedictine Rule, along with 
extremely elaborate and splendid worship, which left little time for manual labour (for which they came to 
be criticized). Their principles inspired Pope Gregory VU’s reforms, especially against simony and clerical 
marriage. An important Cluniac reformer in the twelfth century was Peter the Venerable, who clashed with 
Bernard of Clairvaux. 

CLUNY Near Macon in Burgundy, France; the monastery, founded in 909/10, became the centre of the Cluniac 
reform. 

CONRAD III King and Emperor of Germany from 1137 to 1152. As a member of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, his 
election to the throne in preference to the Welf Henry the Proud, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony, led to rivalry 
between the two factions. Hildegard wrote a letter of spiritual encouragement to Conrad in 1150. 

CONRAD, ARCHBISHOP OF MAINZ (1161-5 and 1183-1200) Conrad (or Konrad) of Wittelsbach, brother of 
Duke Otto of Bavaria. Conrad is one of the named witnesses of the imperial edict of protection for the 
Rupertsberg convent on 14 April 1163. Although his election as Archbishop of Mainz had been pushed by 
Frederick Barbarossa, Conrad nevertheless supported the Pope, and in 1164 on the death of the antipope 
Victor IV urged Barbarossa to come to terms with Alexander III. On 23 May 1165, at the imperial court held 
in Wiirzburg, he refused to recognize the new antipope Paschal III; Barbarossa reacted by removing him 
from office and replacing him with Christian de Buch. Conrad fled to Alexander in France and then to Rome, 
where he was appointed Cardinal Bishop of S. Sabina. From 1169 he was active as a papal legate, and after 
the Peace of Venice in 1177, he renounced his claim to the archbishopric of Mainz until the death of 
Christian in 1183. 

CREMONA Venue of the Synod in 1148 at which Arnold of Brescia was excommunicated, shortly after 
Hildegard’s writings were approved at the Synod of Trier. 

CRUSADES The series of expeditions, often inspired by public sermons on the ‘taking of the Cross’, which 
aimed to recover the Holy Lands, Jerusalem and Palestine, from Islam and retain them as part of 
Christendom. The First Crusade (1095-99) was a notable success, but the second, preached by Bernard of 
Clairvaux in 1146-7, came to a disastrous end in 1149. In 1187 Saladin took Jerusalem, which led to the 
moderately successful Third Crusade (1189-92), in which Richard the Lionheart of England, Philip II of 
France, and Emperor Frederick Barbarossa of Germany all took part. Though Anselm of Canterbury in the 
eleventh century was opposed to such ventures, most writers in Hildegard’s day seem to have supported the 
aims of the Crusades. 

DENDERMONDE A monastery in Belgium. Codex 9 of its library is the manu-script originally owned by the 
monastery of Villers in Hildegard’s lifetime which contains the oldest version of Hildegard’s Symphonia and 
an important copy of The Book of Life’s Merits. 

DISIBOD A seventh-century Irish bishop who retired to a hermitage near the confluence of the rivers Nahe and 
Gian in the Rhineland. Despite founding a monastery on the hill overlooking the site, he remained in the 
hermitage until his death at the age of 81. Hildegard held him in great respect, writing a Life ofDisibod and 
several songs in his honour. 

DISBODENBERG The hill and site of the monastery founded by the Irishman Disibod in the early Middle Ages 
and refounded at the beginning of the twelfth century. It was here that Hildegard began her monastic life as 
a child recluse under the tutelage of Jutta of Spanheim. The records disagree as to when they moved there: 



no6 according to the Life of Hildegard or 1112 according to the Life offutta. The anchorage eventually 
became a community of nuns with Jutta as abbess; in effect, the institution became a double monastery of 
monks and nuns under the final authority of the abbot. Hildegard succeeded Jutta as abbess of the convent 
in 1136, remaining there until she founded the autonomous community on the Rupertsberg in about 1150. 

EBERHARD, BISHOP OF BAMBERG Elected Bishop in 1146 and consecrated by Pope Eugenius III. Eberhard 
had good relations with Frederick Barbarossa, taking part in the Italian campaigns, and as a reward for his 
support, the abbey of Niederalteich was placed under the control of the bishopric of Bamberg. In 1157 he 
responded to a request from Hildegard and provided a building in Bamberg as a new convent for the use of 
Gertrud of Stahleck and her fellow nuns. In 1163 he was the fifth witness on the imperial deed of protection 
for the Rupertsberg. 

EBERHARD, BISHOP OF SALZBURG Born in 1085, Eberhard of Biburg and Hipoltstein became a canon in 
Bamberg, a monk at Priifening and then an abbot of Biburg in the diocese of Regensburg. On 22 May 1149, 
he was consecrated Bishop of Salzburg. Politically active, his work pleased Conrad III, although he did not 
frequent the imperial court as much as his friend Eberhard of Bamberg. During the schism, he supported 
Pope Alexander III and opposed the election of antipopes such as Victor IV in 1162. Nevertheless, he 
remained a presence among Frederick Barbarossa’s followers and acted as a mediator between emperor and 
pope. In 1163, he attended the imperial court at Mainz, and was the third witness on the imperial deed of 
protection for the Rupertsberg. 

ECKBERT (EKBERT) OF SCHONAU (d.1184) Writer and preacher. Brother and adviser of the visionary 

Elisabeth of Schonau. From 1140 to 1146 he studied in Paris, where he was friends with Rainald of Dassel. 

He subsequently became a canon at St Cassius in Bonn, but after a pilgrimage to Rome in 1155 he became a 
priest and then, after persuasion by Elisabeth, a monk, joining the double monastery at Schonau. He 
eventually became abbot there. Among his many writings, he composed Thirteen Sermons against the 
Cathars, and he preached against this movement at Bonn before 1153, at Cologne in 1163 and at Koblenz in 
1167. 

EIBINGEN Founded by Hildegard c. 1165; a daughter monastery of the Rupertsberg. 

ELISABETH OF SCHONAU (d. 1164) A visionary author who, like many others, experienced most of her visions 
in a state of ecstatic trance (in marked contrast to Hildegard’s waking state). From 1147 a nun at Schonau. 
Her early visions, from 1152 to 1155, are devotional pieces on the lives of Christ and Mary. But from 1155, 
she employed her brother Eckbert to put her compositions down in writing, and under his influence the 
writings become more theological and doctrinal. Her main works are a work influenced by Scivias known as 
The Book of the Ways of God (compiled in 1156-7), an elaboration of the Ursula legend entitled The 
Revelations of the Holy Army of the Virgins of Cologne (1156-7) and a visionary treatise in support of the 
doctrine of the bodily resurrection of Mary (1156-9). Elisabeth corresponded with the older Hildegard for 
support and encouragement. She became magistra (abbess) of her community in 1157. 

ERIGENA (ERIUGENA) John the Scot (c. 810-c. 877). Theologian and philosopher who attempted to reconcile 
the Neoplatonist idea of emanation (i.e. the origin of everything that exists from the One) with the Christian 
idea of creation. His greatest work, Periphyseon, or the Division of Nature, was possibly known to 
Hildegard; she perhaps knew his ideas through excerpts in the works of Honorius of Autun. 

EUGENIUS III (d. 1153) Bernardo Pignatelli of Pisa, elected Pope in 1145. In 1135 he had joined the Cistercian 
Abbey of Clairvaux under Bernard. On his election as Pope he refused to recognize the Roman Senate and 
had to flee from Rome to Farfa and Viterbo and then in 1147 to France, where he commissioned Bernard to 
preach the Second Crusade. Eugenius held synods at Paris (1147), Trier (1147-8) where he personally read 
out and approved Hildegard’s writings, Rheims (1148) where Gilbert Porreta’s writings were scrutinized for 
heresy, and Cremona (1148), where he excommunicated Arnold of Brescia, now leader of the Senate. In 1149 
he was able to return briefly to Rome, and again in 1153, when he died there. Essentially a reformer and 
pious Cistercian, he exchanged a number of letters with Hildegard after the Synod of Trier. 

FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, OR FREDERICK 1 (c. 1122-90) Frederick (Friedrich) of Swabia. King and Emperor 
of Germany. Elected King on the death of his uncle, Conrad III, in 1152, he united the two rival dynasties 



through his mother, a Guelph (Welf), and his father, a Hohenstaufen. In 1153 he signed a treaty of mutual 
support with Pope Eugenius III at Constance, and on 18 June 1155 he was crowned Emperor by Pope 
Hadrian IV, who honoured the Treaty of Constance. But relations between emperor and pope soon changed. 
Hadrian changed his policies and became reconciled with the Norman king of Sicily, William I, at the 
Concordat of Benevento, thus breaking the terms of the Treaty of Constance. At the Diet of Besangon in 
1157, Frederick insisted on the emperor’s rule of a ‘holy empire’, as against the spiritual jurisdiction of the 
pope (this eventually created the title of Holy Roman Emperor). After the papal election of 1159, he 
supported the ‘antipope’ Victor IV against Pope Alexander III, thus isolating himself from Italy, France and 
the Anglo-Norman world. The schism lasted almost eighteen years and led to bitter hostilities, including 
military action by imperial troops in German lands against monastic supporters of the pope. With the aim of 
establishing an imperial state in Lombardy, Barbarossa undertook six major Italian expeditions. In 1162 he 
took Milan. In 1167 he captured Rome, but had to withdraw because of a malaria epidemic. In the end, he 
failed to break the power of the Lombard communes and after his defeat at Legnano in 1176, he submitted to 
Pope Alexander III. In 1181 he overthrew a rival in Germany, Henry the Lion, the head of the Welf dynasty, 
and increased his power by the marriage in 1186 of his son Henry to Constance, heiress of Norman Sicily. 
Frederick Barbarossa died while on the Third Crusade in 1189. 

GEBENO OF EBERBACH Eberbach, in the Rheingau, was a large Cistercian monastery with which Hildegard 
had personal contacts. She wrote to Abbot Ruthard in the 1150s and sent a letter of encouragement to the 
monks in the 1160s, a period when monasteries supporting the pope suffered oppression from imperial 
troops. In 1220, Prior Gebeno of Eberbach composed his Mirror of Future Times, or Pentachronon (i.e. The 
Five Ages), much of which consists of extracts from Hildegard’s apocalyptic or prophetic writings, including 
such correspondence as the letter to King Conrad III (c. 1150; 34) and the letter to the Cologne clerics (c. 
1163). With its one-sided view of the range of her writings, the Pentachronon became the most widely 
known collection of Hildegard’s work in the later Middle Ages. 

GERALD OF WALES (Latin name: Giraldus Cambrensis) (c. 1146-1223) Writer, historian and churchman. 

GERTRUD OF STAHLECK (d. 1191) Sister of King Conrad III and Barbarossa’s aunt. Friend and correspondent 
of Hildegard. Her husband Hermann of Stahleck was a generous supporter of Hildegard’s convent at 
Rupertsberg. After his death in 1156, Gertrud became a nun first at Wechterswinkel in the diocese of 
Wurzburg and then, after Hildegard’s intervention with Bishop Eberhard of Bamberg, at the new foundation 
of St Theodore and St Mary at Bamberg. 

GILBERT PORRETA (c. 1080-1154) Otherwise known as Gilbert de la Porree or Gilbert of Poitiers. Biblical 
commentator and scholastic theologian. After studying under Bernard of Chartres and Anselm of Laon, he 
became a well-known master at Paris. In 1142 he was appointed Bishop of Poitiers. Interested in logic and 
the language of theology, his statements in his commentary on Boethius’s opuscula that ‘God is one’ and 
‘God is three’ led to great controversy, particularly at the Synod of Rheims in 1148. Hildegard was involved in 
this debate when asked for advice on the matter by a master of Paris, Odo of Soissons, in a letter written 
between 1148 and 1150 (see 32; and for Hildegard’s reply, see 4). 

GOTTFRIED OF DISIBODENBERG (Latin name: Godefridus monachus) The monk of Disibodenberg who 
became Hildegard’s secretary in 1174, a year after the death of Volmar. His Life of Hildegard was incomplete 
when he died in 1176, and was finished by Theoderich of Echternach. 

GOTTFRIED OF STRASSBURG Middle High German poet. Author of the Arthurian epic Tristan (c. 1210). 

GREGORY THE GREAT (c. 540-604) From 590 Pope Gregory I. Regarded in the Middle Ages along with 

Ambrose, Augustine and Jerome as one of the four great ‘Doctors of the Church’. His many writings include 
the Moralia (a commentary on Job), homilies on the gospels, and the Pastoral Care, a guide to the 
psychology of teaching and ministry. 

GREGORY VII, POPE (1073-85) Hildebrand, a native of Tuscany (born between 1015 and 1034), became one of 
the most influential popes of the period. At the Lenten Synod of 1074, he issued decrees against simony, i.e. 
the payment of money to promote people to higher offices in the Church, and against clerical marriage. He 



also sought to gain exclusive control over the appointment of bishops. This led to the ‘investiture 
controversy’, for he was almost immediately opposed by the king of the German Empire, Henry IV, who 
wished to retain investiture along with royal power over bishops. The long and bitter disputes between pope 
and king continued in the twelfth century, with frequent papal excommunications of the German kings, who 
reacted by electing their own ‘antipopes’. 

GREGORY IX (c. 1148-1241) Pope from 1227. During his pontificate, in 1233, the canonization protocol was 
commissioned to provide evidence for Hildegard’s sanctity. This was rejected on its completion and returned 
for revision in 1237, but the revised version apparently never reached Pope Innocent IV, who wrote a letter 
in 1243 asking for the new claim to be submitted. 

GUIBERT OF GEMBLOUX (German name: Wibert) (1124/5-1213) Writer and monk of Gembloux near Namur 
in Flanders. Extremely learned, he was considerably influenced by the Latin classics in his style of writing. 
During the 1170s, Hildegard’s reputation reached Guibert and he became a great admirer of her work. From 
1175, therefore, he began a correspondence with her which culminated in a visit to the Rupertsberg in the 
autumn of that year. He also prepared the Thirty-Eight Questions with the monks of the monastery of 
Villers and sent it to Hildegard in 1176. From 1177 Guibert served as Hildegards secretary until her death in 
1179; he returned to Gembloux in 1180. In 1188/9 he was Abbot of Florennes near Namur and then from 
1194 Abbot of Gembloux. 

HADRIAN IV, POPE (c. 1100-59) Nicholas Breakspear, the only English Pope. In 1154, he secured the expulsion 
of Arnold of Brescia from Rome and in 1155 obtained homage from Frederick Barbarossa before agreeing to 
his coronation as Emperor. In 1157 his legates met Frederick at Besangon and delivered his claim that the 
Emperor held his position as a ‘benefice’ from the Pope. This led to a severe dispute, which eventually 
became a schism during the pontificate of Alexander III. Hildegard wrote an admonitory letter to him on his 
election to the papal see in 1154. 

HARTWIG, ARCHBISHOP OF BREMEN Hartwig of Stade, Archbishop of Bremen 1148-68. His sister was 

Richardis of Stade, the nun and friend of Hildegard at Disibodenberg. Their parents were Rudolf I, Margrave 
of Stade in North Germany (d. 1124) and Margravine (or Marchioness) Richardis, originally of Spanheim- 
Lavanttal (d. 1151); the Margravine’s second cousin was Jutta of Spanheim. After the death of his brother 
Rudolf in 1144, Hartwig was involved in an inheritance dispute with Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony, who 
imprisoned him. On his appointment in 1148, he aimed to extend the power of his archbishopric in 
Scandinavia and then north-east Germany, in 1149 reestablishing the three bishoprics of Oldenburg, 
Mecklenburg and Ratzburg. But at the Diet of Goslar in 1154 Henry the Lion was given the power to invest 
the three bishops, despite Hartwig’s protests. In the same year he fell into disfavour with Frederick 
Barbarossa for refusing to perform military service on the imperial expedition to Italy. In 1166 he supported 
the revolt in Saxony against Henry the Lion. 

HEINRICH, ARCHBISHOP OF MAINZ (1142-53) As head of the local diocese, Heinrich was at first a great 
encourager for Hildegard. He supported her at the Synod of Trier of 1147-8, and at the instigation of 
Richardis’s mother, Margravine Richardis of Spanheim-Lavanttal, he persuaded Abbot Kuno of 
Disibodenberg to allow Hildegard to found the abbey at Rupertsberg. On 1 May 1152, he consecrated the new 
church there, but the same year saw the demise of his career when he failed to support the election of 
Frederick Barbarossa as King and Emperor. In 1153 Heinrich was deposed, despite an appeal from Hildegard 
to Pope Eugenius III. 

HEINRICH OF VELDEKE Author of the Middle High German poem Eneit (1170s), based on classical sources; 
an early example of the vernacular literature that was beginning to flourish at the end of Hildegard’s career. 

HELENGER Abbot of Disibodenberg (1155-79). A regular correspondent with Hildegard. 

HENRY II King of England (1154-89). 

HENRY IV (or HEINRICH IV) (1050-1106) King and Emperor of Germany from 1056, he was declared of age in 
1065. His reign is characterized by wars with the rebel Saxon princes and conflicts with Pope Gregory VII, 
particularly over the investiture of bishops and abbots. In 1077 he submitted to the Pope at Canossa, but the 



conflict was later renewed. Henry installed an antipope Clement III at Rome in 1084, who crowned him 
Emperor in the same year. 

HENRY v Henry IV’s successor (1106-25). During his reign the investiture controversy was settled at the 
Concordat of Worms (1122). 

HENRY VI King of Germany and Holy Roman Emperor (1190-7). Frederick Barbarossa’s successor. 

HENRY OF LIEGE (German name: Heinrich von Liittich) Henry of Leyen, probably a monk at Bilsen near 
Maastricht. Served as Bishop of Liege 1145-64. He was loyal to the Emperor, and his name appears on many 
of Frederick Barbarossa’s charters. He took part in the first Italian expedition of 1154, attending the 
Emperor’s coronation in 1155. In 1163, he was to be the seventh witness on the imperial deed of protection 
for the Rupertsberg convent. 

HENRY THE LION (1129-95) Duke of Saxony and Bavaria and head of the Welf dynasty. At first enjoying good 
relations with the Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, he took part in the first Italian campaign of 1154 and 1155 
and in return was given back the duchy of Bavaria by Barbarossa in 1156. He expanded Saxony eastwards, 
developing Liineburg, Bremen, Lubeck and Braunschweig (Brunswick). He was a lifelong enemy of Hartwig 
of Bremen, with whom he disputed the jurisdiction of three north-eastern bishoprics. In 1166 he was 
opposed by a League of princes and then finally in 1180 by Barbarossa. He was exiled twice (1181-5, 1189- 
90) and became reconciled to the Emperor (Henry VI) in 1194. 

HERMANN, BISHOP OF CONSTANCE Imperial supporter. Served as Bishop of Constance in southern Germany 
to 1166. In 1140, Hermann corresponded with Bernard of Clairvaux, who warned him of Arnold of Brescia, at 
that time in Constance. In March 1153 he presided over the wedding ceremony of Frederick Barbarossa and 
Adelheid of Vohburg. In 1154 he took part in the Italian campaign and as a result had all his properties 
confirmed by the Emperor in 1155. On 22 May he was one of many bishops who supported the antipope 
Paschal III. Hildegard’s letters to Hermann are critical and admonitory. 

HERMAS Christian visionary author of the second century. The Shepherd of Hermas appears to have influenced 
Hildegard with its emphasis on visions, its teaching on the virtues, and its use of architectural imagery as in 
the later parts of Scivias. 

HERRAD OF LANDSBERG (d. 1196) Female writer and from about 1178 head of a community of Augustinian 
canons at Hohenbourg near Strassbourg. Author and compiler of the illustrated theological textbook, The 
Garden of Delights (1160s and 70s). 

HONORIUS ‘OF AUTUN’ Popular writer on theology active in the early twelfth century. Probably not from 
Autun, he possibly became a monk in Germany and spent time in England, where he composed his 
Elucidarium, a survey of Christian doctrine with parallels to Hildegard’s Scivias in coverage of themes. His 
later work Gemma animae uses allegory and symbolism to discuss the liturgy, while his Imago mundi treats 
cosmology and geography. 

HUGH OF ST VICTOR (d. 1142) Theologian at St Victor, a house of Augustinian canons in Paris, which he 
joined in about 1115. Author of the large survey of doctrine The Sacraments of the Christian Faith, the 
mystical treatise TheAi'k of Noah and the widely used textbook on the arts known as Didascalicon. 

HUGO (d. 1177) One of Hildegard’s brothers. Cathedral cantor at Mainz. He assisted Hildegard for a short 
period as secretary after the death of Gottfried of Disibodenberg. 

JOACHIM OF FIORE (c. 1135-1202) Biblical commentator and writer, with a strong interest in mysticism and 
prophecy, particularly his idea of the ‘three ages’ of the world corresponding to the three persons of the 
Trinity. At first a monk of the Benedictine, and later Cistercian, monastery of Corazzo, he unwillingly agreed 
to be elected Abbot in 1177 but eventually retired, with papal approval, to the Sila mountains in 1196. 

JOHN OF SALISBURY (c. 1115-80) Humanist, writer and churchman. After studying in Paris under Abelard, 
William of Conches and Gilbert Porreta, he entered the diplomatic service of Theobald, Archbishop of 
Canterbury, from 1147 and of Thomas Becket from 1161. In December 1170 he was present in Canterbury 
when Becket was murdered by Henry II’s men. From 1176 he was Bishop of Chartres, and he took part in the 
Third Lateran Council in 1179. His writings include the political study Policraticus, the textbook Metalog icon 



and the History of the Popes. 

JUTTA OF SPANHEIM (or SPONHEIM) Daughter of Count Stephan of Spanheim and member of an influential 
Rhineland family. With a clear vocation for the life of a recluse, she became guardian to the eight-year-old 
Hildegard after her parents had dedicated her to the spiritual life. She was later Abbess of the convent at 
Disibodenberg until her death in 1136. Her brother Count Meginhard of Spanheim gave financial and 
material assistance to the foundation of Hildegard’s convent at Rupertsberg in the 1150s. 

KUNO Abbot of Disibodenberg from 1136 to 1155. 

KURENBERG Twelfth-century poet from Austria. Known as ‘der von Kiirenberg’, he wrote in Middle High 
German rather than Latin. Author of the celebrated ‘Falcon Song’ (1160s). 

LAMPRECHT German writer, a pioneer in the use of the vernacular. He wrote his poem Alexander in the 1140s. 

LINGUA IGNOTA Hildegard’s ‘Unknown Language’, compiled as a glossary in the period 1151-8. 

LUCCA MANUSCRIPT A thirteenth-century manuscript held at Lucca (Bibl. Governativa, cod. 1942) containing 
a series of illustrations to The Book of Divine Works. 

LUDWIG OF TRIER Abbot of St Eucharius in Trier and personal acquaintance of Hildegard. Along with 
Gottfried of Echternach, Ludwig commissioned Theoderich to write the Life of Hildegard in the 1180s. 

MACROBIUS Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius, fifth-century Roman writer. Author of The Dream ofScipio, a 
work on number-mysticism, oracles, virtue, astronomy, music, geography and the soul. The work was widely 
read in the Middle Ages and helped to transmit Neoplatonist ideas to the Latin West. 

MARIE DE FRANCE A contemporary woman author of very different inclinations from Hildegard’s, who wrote 
tales of chivalry and romance in her native French. She probably lived in England. 

ODO OF SOISSONS, or ODO OF PARIS A master at Paris who wrote to Hildegard in 1148 to find out her 
understanding of the nature of God and the Trinity as discussed at the controversial Council of Rheims, 
where Gilbert Porreta withdrew some of his more audacious statements on the question. 

ORDO VIRTUTUM Hildegard’s ‘Play of the Virtues’, originally conceived in a shorter version in the final vision 
of Book 3 of Scivias and rewritten as a separate play or opera in the period 1151-8. 

PASCHAL III Guido of Crema. At the instigation of Rainald of Dassel, imperial chancellor, he was elected 
antipope in 1164 after the death of Victor IV. At Christmas 1165, he canonized Charlemagne. On his death in 
1168 he was succeeded by a further antipope, Callistus III. 

PETER LOMBARD (c. 1100-60) Theologian and teacher at Paris from 1143 or 1144. He attended the Council of 
Rheims in 1148, where he opposed Gilbert Porreta. Author of the Sentences, a classic textbook of medieval 
theology arranged in four books to cover (1) the Trinity, (2) creation and sin, (3) the incarnation and virtues, 
(4) the sacraments and the four last things. 

PHYSICA Alternative title Liber simplicis medicinae (‘Book of Simple Medicine’). Written 1151-8. Hildegard’s 
survey of the phenomena of the natural world (plants, metals, stones etc.) and their medicinal uses. 
Together with Causes and Cures, it may have originally formed a single work known as Liber subtilitatum 
diversarum naturarum creaturarum (‘The Book of the Subtleties of the Diverse Natures of Creatures’). 
Three complete manuscripts survive, one from the thirteenth and two from the fifteenth centuries. 

PRUDENTIUS Aurelius Clemens Prudentius (348-c. 410). Christian poet of the late Roman Empire. Apart from 
his hymns, he is best known for his Psychomachia, an allegorical poem about the struggle of the Soul and 
the Church, in which seven vices are overcome by the powers of seven virtues. 

PTOLEMY Claudius Ptolemaeus. Greek astronomer writing at Alexandria from AD 146 to 170. His writings, 
especially his textbook the Almagest, were particularly influential. 

RAINALD OF DASSEL (c. 1118/20-67) Important politician in Germany. In 1153 he was part of the embassy 
sent to Eugenius III in Rome; from 1156 he was Chancellor of the German Empire and from 1159 
Archbishop of Cologne. Between 1158 and 1164 he led the imperial troops on their expeditions to Italy. It 
was his reading of the pope’s letter at the Diet of Besangon that led to a rift between emperor and pope. 
During the schism his excommunication by Alexander III in 1163 led to his insistence on the election of a 



new antipope, Paschal III, in 1164. 

RICHARDIS (d. 1151) Richardis, Margravine (Marchioness) of Spanheim-Lavanttal. Influential noblewoman, 
widow of Rudolf I of Stade, mother of the nun Richardis and of the churchman Hartwig of Bremen, 
grandmother and guardian of Adelheid of Gandersheim. Related to Jutta of Spanheim. She intervened on 
Hildegard’s behalf with Archbishop Heinrich of Mainz to gain his support for the move to Rupertsberg. 

RICHARDIS OF STADE (d. 1152) A nun of Hildegard’s community and a close friend and assistant. Richardis 
left Rupertsberg to become the Abbess of Bassum in 1151, which led to an emotional dispute recorded in a 
number of highly personal letters (see 12). 

RIESENKODEX (i.e. ‘Giant Codex’) The large compilation of Hildegard’s works copied at the Rupertsberg after 
her death. The book is manuscript 2 in the collection of the Hessische Landesbibliothek in Wiesbaden, 
Germany. 

RUPERT OF DEUTZ (c. 1075-1129) A monk of Liege who became Abbot of Deutz near Cologne in 1120. His 
work of 1125, On the Glory and Honour of the Son of Man, a commentary on Matthew, mentions visions 
which, rather like Hildegard, he had experienced for a long time without revealing this to others. 

RUPERT, SAINT A legendary young prince in the Rhineland during the Carolingian period who became devout 
after a pilgrimage to Rome at the age of fifteen, whereupon he gave away his property and built churches 
and hospices on his extensive lands. After his death aged twenty his mother Bertha founded a monastery in 
his honour at the Rupertsberg. 

RUPERTSBERG A hill overlooking the junction of the River Nahe with the Rhine at Bingen. The site of a shrine 
to Saint Rupert which was destroyed by the Vikings in the ninth century. Hildegard decided to locate her 
independent monastery there and moved from the Disibodenberg with a group of her nuns in about 1150. 

RUPERTSBERG SCIVIAS, THE The famous Rupertsberg copy of Scivias (Wiesbaden, Hessische 

Landesbibliothek, manuscript 1) with illustrations done by artists probably under the direction of Hildegard 
herself. Lost in 1945, its text and artwork are preserved in photocopies and a colour facsimile at the Abbey of 
St Hildegard at Eibingen. 

SALEM SCIVIAS, THE The twelfth-century Salem Scivias, with a different set of illustrations from those in the 
Rupertsberg manuscript. Now in Heidelberg University Library, cod. Sal. X 16. 

SCIVIAS (‘KNOW THE WAYS’) Hildegard’s first major work (1141-51), an encyclopedic survey of salvation 
history and Church doctrine, divided into three parts or ‘books’ of six, seven and thirteen visions 
respectively. The work survives in ten complete manuscripts, six of them from the twelfth century, including 
the illustrated Rupertsberg and Salem manuscripts. 

TENGSWICH OF ANDERNACH Tengswich, or Tengswindis, was Mistress of Sankt Marien, a house of canons 
regular at Andernach in the Rhine Valley north of Bingen. In a letter dated 1148-50 (no. 52 in the Collected 
Letters ), Tengswich criticized Hildegard’s hierarchical attitudes, in particular her refusal to allow girls from 
lower down the social scale to join her community at Disibodenberg. She also asked whether it was true that 
on feast days Hildegard allowed her nuns to wear rings and diadems decorated with allegorical figures. This 
question, it is thought, may reflect accounts heard by Tengswich of a performance of The Play of the Virtues. 

THEODORIC (THEODERICH) OF ECHTERNACH Monk and writer from Echternach (now in Luxembourg). 
Author of the second and third books of the Life of Hildegard, begun originally by Gottfried of 
Disibodenberg but not finished by the time of his death in 1176. Theoderich was commissioned to do the 
work by Ludwig of St Eucharius in Trier, a personal friend of Hildegard, and by Abbot Gottfried of 
Echternach. It was completed in the 1180s. 

THOMAS A BECKET St Thomas Becket (c. 1120-70). From 1155 Chancellor of England under Henry II, he 
resigned when he was elected Archbishop of Canterbury in 1162. After his murder in 1170 by Henry’s men, 
he was canonized by Pope Alexander II in 1173. 

TIMAEUS Plato’s work on cosmology; known in Western Europe in the twelfth century through a Latin 
translation by Chalcidius. 

URSULA, SAINT According to the legend current in Hildegard’s day, St Ursula was a British princess of the dark 



ages who renounced her marriage and travelled with 11,000 virgins on a pilgrimage to Rome. On their return 
journey, they were massacred by the barbarian Huns at Cologne. In the early twelfth century an old 
cemetery was uncovered in which they were supposedly buried, and their relics, a physical token of their 
virtue and influence, were widely distributed. 

VICTOR IV Octavian of Santa Cecilia. Italian churchman and antipope (1159-64). In 1151 he was a papal legate 
to Germany and in 1155 led the advance guard at the coronation of Frederick Barbarossa in Rome. In 1159 he 
was involved in the disputed papal election with Roland (Alexander III), which began the eighteen-year 
schism within the Western Church. 

VOLMAR (d. 1173) Monk of Disibodenberg. The first to encourage Hildegard in her writing, he became her 
secretary and moved with her to the Rupertsberg. 

WILLIAM OF CONCHES (c. 1080-c. 1154) Philosopher and Christian humanist; pupil of Bernard of Chartres. 
His works include commentary glosses on Priscian’s Institutions of Grammar, Plato’s Timaeus, and 
Boethius’s Consolation of Philosophy . 


