History of Zoroastrianism 
by

 Maneckji Nusservanji Dhalla 
High Priest of the Parsis, Karachi, India

idha apãm vijasâiti
vanghuhi daena mâzdayasnaish
vispâish avi karshvãn yâish hapta.
"Henceforth from now may spread
The Good Mazdayasnian Religion
Over all the zones that are seven."

NEW YORK
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON TORONTO,

1938

TO
KHAN BAHADUR
KAVASJI HORMASJI KATRAK, O.B.E.

at hvo vangheush vahyo nâ aibijamyât
ye nâo erezush savangho patho sîshoit
ahyâ angheush astvato mananghaschâ
haithyeng âstîsh yeng â shaetî ahuro
aredro thwâvãns huzentushe spento mazdâ.
"May that man attain to better than the good
Who helps teaching us the upright paths of blessedness
Of this material world and that of the spirit
-- The veritable universe wherein pervades Ahura -That faithful, wise, and holy man is like unto thee, O Mazda."

Zarathushtra

CONTENTS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABBREVIATIONS
INTRODUCTION
PRE-GATHIC PERIOD
From the earliest times to about 1000 B.C.
CHAPTER
I.
THE SOURCES
The data of information -- The Avestan Nasks -The Pahlavi, Pazend and Persian sources -- ParsiSanskrit and Gujarati sources -- Oriental sources
-- Occidental sources -- Inscriptions, coins and
tablets as the last source of information.
II.
AIRYANA VAEJAH
The Stem-land of the Aryans -- The IndoEuropeans -- The Indo-Iranians.
THE GATHIC PERIOD
About 1000 B.C.
III.
ZARATHUSHTRA
Zarathushtra doubts to know -- Zarathushtra
seeks silent, solitary seclusion -- Zarathushtra
yearns to see Ahura Mazda -- Zarathushtra longs
to commune with Ahura Mazda -- Zarathushtra
is fined with an intense fervour of enthusiasm for
prophetic work -- People marvel at the new
prophet -- Zarathushtra definitely breaks with
the religion of his forefathers -- The hostile
Daevayasnian priests -- Friendless and forlorn,
Zarathushtra flees to Ahura Mazda -Zarathushtra's teachings win the ear of the royal
court -- Zarathushtra's mission.
IV.
TOWARDS MONOTHEISM.
Gods in evolution.
V.
AHURA MAZDA
Ahura Mazda is the name Zarathushtra gives to
God -- Ahura Mazda is the Being par excellence
-- The nature of Ahura Mazda -- The
transcendental immanence of Ahura Mazda -Ahura Mazda is the creator -- Ahura Mazda is
the lord of wisdom -- Ahura Mazda is the lawgiver and judge.
VI.
SPENTA MAINYU
Spenta Mainyu is the self-revealing activity of
Ahura Mazda.

PAGE
xix
xxix
xxxi

3

8

11

27
30

36

VII.

VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII.

MAZDA'S MINISTERING ANGELS
Amesha Spentas in the making -- Vohu Manah -The first in Ahura Mazda's creation -- Vohu
Manah is Ahura Mazda's Good Thought.
PRAYERS AND RITUALS
LIFE IS A BLESSING
EVIL
LIFE AFTER DEATH
THE FINAL DISPENSATION

THE AVESTAN PERIOD
From about 800 B.C. to about A.D. 200 at the latest
INDIA LEAVES INDO-IRANIAN RELIGION
XIII.
BEHIND
IRAN GOES BACK TO INDO-IRANIAN
XIV.
RELIGION
PROMULGATION OF THE FAITH OF
XV.
ZARATHUSHTRA
ZARATHUSHTRA IN THE YOUNGER
XVI.
AVESTA
XVII.
THE YOUNGER AVESTAN RELIGION
XVIII.
THE IDEA OF GOD IN THE MILLENNIUM
XIX.
AHURA MAZDA
XX.
SPENTA MAINYU
XXI.
AMESHA SPENTAS
XXII.
YAZATAS
XXIII.
FRAVASHIS
XXIV. PERSONIFIED ABSTRACTIONS
XXV.
BAGHAS
XXVI. PRAYERS AND RITUALS
XXVII. EVIL
XXVIII. DEATH AND BEYOND
XXIX.
THE RENOVATION
THE PAHLAVI PERIOD
From the third to the ninth century
ZOROASTRIANISM UNDER THE FOREIGN
XXX.
YOKE
XXXI.
THE BIRTH OF CHRISTIANITY
XXXII. MITHRAISM
XXXIII. ZARATUSHT IN THE PAHLAVI WORKS
ZOROASTRIANISM AS TAUGHT BY THE
XXXIV.
PAHLAVI WORKS
XXXV. THE ACTIVE PROPAGANDA OF THE

39

68
75
81
96
108

115
125
129
139
145
150
125
125
162
173
232
244
246
248
257
278
288

293
298
302
309
318
325

FAITH
XXXVI. SECTS
XXXVII. HERESIES
XXXVIII. OHRMAZD
XXXIX. AMSHASPANDS
XL.
IZADS
XLI.
FAROHARS
XLII.
PRAYERS AND RITUALS
XLIII.
EVIL
XLIV.
LIFE AFTER DEATH
XLV.
THE RENOVATION
A PERIOD OF DECADENCE
From the seventh to the eighteenth century
DOWNFALL OF THE SASANIANS, AND
XLVI.
THE AFTERMATH
XLVII. EXODUS TO INDIA
ZARTUSHT DURING THE PERSIAN
XLVIII.
PERIOD
XLIX.
PERSIAN WORKS ON ZOROASTRIANISM
L.
MYSTICS AND MYSTICISM
LI.
RELIGIOUS CONTROVERSIES
AN EPOCH-MAKING ERA IN THE
LII.
HISTORY OF ZOROASTRIAN RESEARCHES
PROSELYTIZING COMES TO BE VIEWED
LIII.
WITH DISFAVOUR
GUJARATI LITERATURE BEARING UPON
LIV.
ZOROASTRIANISM

LV.
LVI.
LVII.
LVIII.
LIX.
LX.
LXI.

A PERIOD OF REVIVAL
Nineteenth century and after
MODERNISM VERSUS TRADITIONALISM
THE REVIVAL OF LEARNING AMONG THE
PARSIS
INTRODUCTION OF THE WESTERN
METHOD OF IRANIAN SCHOLARSHIP IN
INDIA
CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES ATTACK
ZOROASTRIANISM
THE REFORM MOVEMENT
PARSI THEOSOPHISTS
CONCLUSION

330
338
350
357
368
375
379
384
407
423

437
423
449
457
461
470
472
474
477

481
483
486
491
495
502
509

[xix]

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aerpatastan.
Andarz-i Atarpat-i
Maraspand.
Andarz-i-Khusro-iKavatan.
Anquetil du Perron.

Aogemadaecha.
Aogemadaecha.
Aogemadaecha.
Arda Viraf.
Arda Viraf Nameh.
Avesta.

Avesta.
Avesta.
Avesta.
Avesta.

Avesta,
Ayuso, F. G.
Bahman Yasht.
Balsara, P. P.

Translated from the Avesta-Pahlavi texts by S.J. Bulsara. Bombay,
1915.
The Pahlavi text, edited and translated by Peshutan Dastur Behramji
Sanjana. Bombay, 1885.
The Pahlavi text, edited and translated by Peshutan Dastur Behramji
Sanjana; Bombay, 1885.
Zend-Avesta, Ouvrage de Zoroastre, contenant les Idées Theologiques,
Physiques et Morales de ce Législateur, les Cérémonies du Culte
Religieux qu'i1 a etabli, et plusieurs Traits Importants relatifs a
l'ancienne Histoire des Perses. 3 vols. Paris, 1771.
The Pazand and Sanskrit texts, edited and translated into German by
Wilhelm Geiger. Erlangen, 1878.
Translated into English by James Darmesteter. In Sacred Books of the
East, Vol. 4, second edition.
The Pahlavi Texts of, Edited by B. N. Dhabhar in Indo-Iranian Studies in
honour of Dastur D. P. Sanjana, p.117-130. London, 1925.
The Pahlavi text, edited and translated by Hoshangji Jamaspji Asa,
Martin Hang, and E. W. West. Bombay, 1872.
The Original Pahlavi Text with Persian version of Zartosht Behrain in
verse, edited by Kaikhusru J. Jamasp Asa. Bombay, 1902
The Sacred Books of the Parsis. Edited by Karl F. Geldner. Stuttgart,
1885-1896. (For Yt. 22-24 and the Avestan Fragments see N. L.
Westergaard's Zendavesta, Copenhagen, 1852-1854.).
Translated into French by C, de Harlez. Livre Sacré du Zoroastrisme. 2
éd. Paris, 1881.
Translated into French by James Darmesteter. Le Zend-Avesta, 3 vols.
Paris, 1892, 1893. (Annales du Musée Guimet, vols. 21, 22, 24).
Translated into English by James Darmesteter and L. H. Mills. In Sacred
Books of the East, vols, 4, 23, 31.
Translated into German by Fritz Wolff. Strassburg, 1910. (For the
German translation of the Gathas see Christian Bartholomae's Die
Gatha's des Awesta, Strassburg; 1905. See also the English rendering of
Bartholomae's German translation in Early Zoroastrianism by J. H.
Moulton, London, 1913).
Pahlavi, and Ancient Persian Studies in Honour of the late Shams-ul
Ulama Dastur Peshotanji Behramji Sanjana. Strassburg, 1904.
Los pueblos Iranios y Zoroastro. Madrid, 1874.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
East, vol. 5.
Ancient Iran. Its contribution to Human progress. Bombay, 1936.

Bartholomae,
Christian.
Benveniste, Emile.
Bharucha, Sheriarji
D.
Bilimoria, N. F.
Böklen, E.
Bousset, W.
Bradke, P. von.
Brodbeck, A.
Buch, M. A.
Bundahishn.
Bundahishn.

Bundahishn.
Cama Memorial
Volume.
Carter, G. W.
Casartelli, L. C.

Chatterjee, J. M.
Cheyne, T. K.
Clemen, C.
Clemen, C.
Collected Sanskrit
Writings of the
Parsis.
Cumont, Franz.
Cumont, Franz.
Dabistan.
Dadachanji, F. K.
Dadistan-i Dinik.
Darmesteter, James.
Darmesteter, James.

Altiranisches Wörterbuch. Strassburg, 1904.
the Persian Religion according to the chief Greek Texts. Paris, 1929.
A Brief Sketch of the Zoroastrian Religion and Customs. Bombay,
1893.
Zoroastrianism in the Light of Theosophy. Bombay, 1896.
Die Verwandtschaft der jüdisch-christlichen mit der parsischen
Eschatologie. Göttingen, 1902.
Die Religion des Judentums in neutestamentlichen Zeitalter. Berlin,
1903.
Dyaus, Asura, Ahura Mazda. Halle, 1885.
Zoroaster. Leipzig, 1893.
Zoroastrian Ethics. Baroda, 1919.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
East, vol. 5.
An Untranslated Chapter of the Bundehesh. Edited and translated by
Jivanji Jamshedji Modi, in Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society. Bombay, 1902.
Edited by T. D. and B. T. Anklesaria. Bombay, 1908.
Edited by J. J. Modi. Bombay, 1900.
Zoroastrianism and Judaism. Boston, 1918.
The Philosophy of the Mazdayasnian Religion under the Sassanids.
Translated from the French by Firoz Jamaspji Jamasp Asa. Bombay,
1889.
the Ethical Conceptions of the Gatha. Navsari, 1932.
Book of Psalms, its origin, and its relation to Zoroastrianism. In Semitic
Studies in Memory of Rev. Dr. A. Kohut. Berlin, 1897.
Fontes Historiae Religionis Persicae. Bonn, 1920.
Die Griechischen und Lateinischen Nachrichten über die Persische
Religion. Giessen, 1920.
Part 1. Khorda-Avesta. Part 2. Ijisni. Part 3. Mainyoi Khard. Part 4.
Skanda Gumani Gujara. Edited by Sheriarji D. Bharucha. Bombay,
1906-1913.
Texts et monuments relatifs au culte de Mithra. 2 vols. Paris, 1893.
The Mysteries of Mithra. Translated from the French by T. J.
McCormack. Chicago, 1903.
Translated from the origina1 Persian by Shea and Troyer. 3 vols. Paris,
1843.
Light of the Avesta and the Gathas. Bombay, 1913.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
East, vol. 18.
Haurvatat et Arneretat. In Bibliothèque de l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes,
vol. 23. Paris, 1875.
Ormazd et Ahriman. Paris, 1877.

The Moral and Ethical Teachings of Zarathushtra. Bombay, 1928.
The Ethical Religion of Zoroaster. New York, 1931
Published by Mulla Firuz Bin Kaus. Persian and English. 2 vols.
Bombay, 1818.
Zoroastrian Theology. New York, 1914.
Dhalla, M. N.
Dina i Mainu i Khrat. Edited by Darab P. Sanjana. Bombay, 1895.
Books 3-9. Edited and translated from the Pahlavi text by Peshutan and
Dinkard.
Darab Sanjana. Vols. 1-19. Bombay. 1874-1919.
Books 7-9. Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred
Dinkard.
Books of the East, vols. 37, 47.
Dinkard [Denkard]. The Complete Text. Edited by D. M. Madan. 2 vols. Bombay, 1911.
The Date and Country of Zarathushtra. Hyderabad (Deccan), 1912.
Dinshaw, V.
Edited by James Hastings. 12 vols. Edinburgh, 1908-1921.
Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
Epistles of
East, vol. 18.
Manushchihar.
Le Livre des Rois, traduit et commente par Jules Mohl. 7 vols. Paris
Firdausi.
1876-1878.
Translated into English by A. G. Warner and E. Warner. vols. 1-9.
Firdausi.
London, 1905-1925.
The Zend-Avesta and Eastern Religions. Baltimore, 1898.
Fluegel, M.
Passages in Greek and Latin Literature relating to Zoroaster and
Fox, W. S., and
Pemberton, R. E. K. Zoroastrianism translated into English in the Journal of the K. R. Cama
Oriental lnstitute, No.14. Bombay, 1929.
The Pahlavi text, edited and translated by Peshutan Dastur Behramji
Ganj-i Shayigan.
Sanjana, Bombay, 1885.
Translated into English by J. M. Chatterjee. Navsari, 1933.
Gatha.
Translated into English by K. E. Punegar. In the Journal of the K. R. Cama
Gathas.
Oriental Institute, No. 12. Bombay, 1928.
Die Amesha Spentas. Wien, 1916.
Geiger, Bernhard.
Civilization of the Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times. Translated from
Geiger, Wilhelm.
the German by Darab Dastur Peshutan Sanjana. 2 vols. London, 1885,
1886.
Zarathushtra in the Gathas and in the Greek and Roman Classics.
Geiger, W., and
Translated by Darab P. Sanjana. Leipzig, 1897.
Windischmann, Fr.
References to Zoroaster in Syriac and Arabic Literature. In Classical
Gottheil, R. J. H.
Studies in Honour of Henry Drisler. New York, 1894.
Mazdaism in the Light of Vishnuism. Mysore, 1913.
Govindacharya, A.
The Foundations of the Iranian Religions. Bombay, 1929.
Gray, L. H.
Herausgegeben von W. Geiger und E. Kuhn. 2 vo1s. Strassburg, 1895Grundriss der
Iranischen Philologie. 1904.
The Pahlavi text, edited and translated by Hoshangji Jamaspji Asa,
Hadokht Nask.
Martin Haug, and E. W. West. Bombay, 1872.
Les Origines du Zoroastrisme. Paris, 1878, 1879.
Harlez, C. de.
Dastur, M. N.
Dawson, M. M.
Desatir.

Haug, Martin.
Henry, Victor,
Hertel, J.
Hertel, J.
Hertel, J.
Hertel, J.
Hertel, J.
Hodivala, S. K.
Hodivala, S. K.
Hodivala, S. K.
Hoshang Memorial
Volume.
Hovelacque, A.
Hyde, Thomas.

Essays On the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis.
3d ed. Edited and enlarged by E. W. West. London, 1884.
Le Parsisme. Paris, 1905.
Indo-Iranische Quellen und Forschungen, Heft 1: Die Zeit Zoroasters.
Leipzig, 1924.
Die Himmelstore im Veda und Awesta. Leipzig, 1924.
Achaemeniden und Kayaniden. Leipzig, 1924.
Die Arische Feuerlehre. 1 Teil. Leipzig, 1925.
Die Sonne und Mithra im Awesta. Leipzig, 1927.
Zarathushtra and His Contemporaries in the Rig Veda. Bombay, 1913.
Parsis of Ancient India. Bombay, 1920.
Indo-Iranian Religion with parallelisms in the Hindu and Zoroastrian
Scriptures. Bombay, 1925.
Bombay, 1918.

L'Avesta, Zoroastre et le Mazdaisme. Paris, 1880.
Historia Religionis veterum Persarum eorumque Magorum. Oxford,
1700.
Indo-Iranian Studies. Being Commemorative Papers contributed by European, American and
Indian Scholars in honor of Dastur Darab P. Sanjana. London, 1925.
Iranian Influence on Moslem Literature. Translated by G. K. Nariman
Inostranzev, M.
with Supplementary Appendices from Arabic Sources. Bombay, 1918.
Zoroaster, the Prophet of Ancient Iran. New York, 1899.
Jackson, A. V.
Williams.
Die Iranische Religion. In Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie, vol. 2, p. 612Jackson, A. V,
708. Strassburg, 1896-1904.
Williams.
Zoroastrian Studies. New York, 1928.
Jackson, A. V.
Williams.
Researches in Manichaeism. New York, 1932.
Jackson, A. V.
Williams.
Edited and translated from the Pahlavi-Pazand iexts by Jivanji
Jamaspi.
Jamshedji Modi. Bombay, 1903.
Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Bombay, 1914.
Madressa Jubilee
Volume.
The Teachings of Zoroaster and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion.
Kapadia, S. A.
London, 1905.
Karaka, Dosabhai F. History of the Parsis. 2 vols. London, 1884.
The Sculptures and Inscriptions of Darius the Great on the Rock of
King, L. W., and
Behistun in Persia: a new Collation of the Persian, Susian, and
Thompson, R. C.
Babylonian Texts. London, 1907.
The Jewish Angelology and Demonology based upon Parsism.
Kohut, Alexander.
Translated from the German by K. R. Cama. Bombay, 1883.
The Zend-Avesta and Solar Religions. New York, 1852.
Lazarus, M. E.
Zarathushtra. Kobenhavn, 1899.
Lehmann, Edvard.

Lommel, Hermann.
Lord, Henry.
Madan, D. M.
McNeile, H.
Meillet, A.
Menant, D.
Menant, J.
Meyer. Edward.
Mills, L. H.
Mills, L. H.
Mills, L. H.
Mills, L. H.
Minu-i Khrat.
Mistri, R. H.
Modi, Jivanji J.
Modi, Jivanji J.
Modi, Jivanji J.
Modi, J. J.
Modi Memorial
Volume.
Moffatt, J.

Die Religion Zarathushtras nach dem Avesta dargestellt. Tubingen,
1936.
The Religion of the Parsees. London, 1630.
Discourses on Iranian Literature. Bombay. 1909.
The Avesta and the Bible. Bombay, 1905.
Trois Conferences sur les Gathas de l'Avesta. Paris, 1925.
Les Parsis. Paris, 1898; tr. in English by M. M. Murzban, The Parsis of
India. 2 vols. Bombay. 1917.
Zoroaster. Essai sur la Philosophte religieuse de la Perse. 2d ed. Paris,
1857.
Geschichte des Alterthums. Stuttgart, 1884.
Zarathushtra and the Greeks. Leipzig. 1903. 1904.
Zarathushtra, Philo, the Achaemenids and Israel. Leipzip, 1905, 1906.
Avesta Eschatology compared with the Books of Daniel and
Revelations. Chicago, 1908.
Our Own Religion in Ancient Persia. 1913.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
East, vol. 24.
Zoroaster and Zoroastrianism. Bombay, 1906.
The Religious System of the Parsees. Bombay, 1885.
The Parsis at the court of Akbat and Dastur Meherjee Rana. Bombay,
1903.
A few events in the early history of the Parsis and their dates. Bombay,
1905.
The Religious Ceremonies and Customs of the Parsees. Bombay, 1922.
Bombay, 1930.

Zoroastrianism and Primitive Christianity. In Hibbert Journal, 1903, p.
763-780; ibid, 1904, p. 347-359.
Early Religious Poetry of Persia. Cambridge, 1911.
Moulton, James H.
Early Zoroastrianism. London, 1913.
Moulton, James H.
The Teachings of Zarathushtra. Bombay, 1916.
Moulton, James H.
The Treasure of the Magi. Oxford, 1917.
Moulton, James H.
The Epistles of Manushchihar. Edited by B. N. Dhabhar. Bombay,
Namakiha-i
1912.
Manushchihar.
Neriosengh's Sanskrit von F. Spiegel. Leipzig, 1861.
Ubersetzung des
Yasna.
Translated from the Avesta-Pahlavi text by S. J. Bulsara. Bombay, 1915.
Nirangastan.
Oriental Studies in London, 1933.
honour of Cursetji
Erachji Pavri.
Edited by Kaikobad A. Nosherwan. Poona, 1899.
Pahlavi Zend-i
Vohuman Yasht.

Pavri, Jal C.
Pazend Texts.

Ragozin, Z. A.
Rapp, A.

Rawlinson, George.
Rawlinson, George.
Rawlinson, George.
Reitzenstein, R.
Rezwi, T.
Rindtortr, E.
Rivayat, Pahlavi,
accompanying the
Dadistan-i Dinik.
Rivayat, Persian of
Darab Hormazyar.
Rivayat, Persian of
Hormazyar Framarz
and others.
Rosenberg, F.
Sad Dar.
Sad Dar.
Sanjana, Darab P.

Sanjana, Rastamji E.
Sanjana, Rastamji E.
Sanjana, Rastamji E.
Scheftelowitz, I.
Shah Namah.
Shatroiha-i Airan.
Shayast la-Shayast.
Shayast-ne-Shayast.

The Zoroastrian Doctrine of a Future Life. New York, 1926.
Collected and Collated by E. K. Antia. Bombay, 1909. Two Afrins,
three Patits tr. into Eng. from Spiegel's German translation by A. H.
B1eeck in Khordah Avesta Hertford, 1864. Seven Afrins, Sitayishes, and
other Pazend prayers tr. into Gujarati by Phiroze E. Masani in Pazend
Prayers Series Nos. 1, 2, 3. Bombay, 1916, 1920, 1931.
Media. New York, 1888.
The Religion and Customs of the Persians and other Iranians as
described by the Grecian and Roman Authors. Translated from the
German by K. R. Cama. Bombay, 1876-1879.
The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World, Chaldea,
Assyria, Babylon, Media, and Persia. 4 vols. London, 1862-1867.
The Sixth Great Oriental Monarchy. London, 1813.
The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy. London, 1816.
Das Iranische Erlösungsmysterium. Bonn, 1921.
Parsis: A People of the Book. Calcutta, 1928.
Die Religion des Zarathushtra. Weimar, 1897.
Edited by B. N; Dhabhar. Bombay, 1913.

Edited by M. R. Unvala with an Introduction by J. J. Modi. 2 vols.
Bombay, 1922.
Their Version with Introduction and Notes by B. N. Dhabhar.
Bombay, 1932.
Le Livre de Zoroastre (Zaratusht-Nama) de Zartusht-i Bahram Pajdu.
St. Petersburg, 1904.
Translated from the Pahlavi-Pazand text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 24.
Edited by B. N. Dhabhar. Bombay, 1909.
Zarathushtra in the Gathas and the Greek and Roman Classics.
Translated from the German of Geiger and Windischmann. Leipzig,
1897.
Zarathushtra and Zarathushtrianism in the Avesta. Leipzig, 1906.
The Parsi Book of Books, the Zend-Avesta. Bombay, 1924.
Spiritualism through Zoroastrian Eyes. Bombay, 1929.
Die altpersische Religion und das Judentum, Unterschiede,
Übereinstimmungen und gegenseitige Beeinflussungen. Giessen, 1920.
See Firdausi.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by Jivanji Jamshedji Modi. Bombay,
1899.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
East, vol. 5.
Edited, transliterated, and translated by Jehangir C. Tavadia. Hamburg,
1930.

Shikand Gumanik
Vijar.
Söderblom, N.
Söderblom, N.
Spiegel, Fr.
Spiegel, Fr.
Spiegel Memorial
Volume.
Stave, E.
Tabari, al-.

Translated from the Pahlavi-Pazand text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books
of the East, vol. 24.
Les Fravashis. Paris, 1899.
La Vie Future d'après le Mazdeisme. Angers 1901.
Eranische Alterthumskunde. 3 vols. Leipzig, 1877, 1878.
Die Arische Periode. Leipzig, 1881.
Edited by Jivanji Jamshedji Modi. Bombay, 1908.

Ueber den Einfluss des Parsismus auf das Judentum. Haarlem, 1898.
Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden, aus der
Arabischen Chronik des Tabari, von Theodor Nöldeke. Leiden, 1879.
Taraporewala, Irach, Some Aspects of the History of Zoroastrianism. Bombay, 1928.
J. S.
Geschichte der Religion im Altertum bis auf Alexander den Grossen.
Tiele, C. P.
Deutsche autorisirte Ausgabe von G. Gehrich. 2 ter Band, Zweite
Hälfte, Die Religion bei den iranischen Völkern. Gotha, 1903.
The Religion of the Iranian Peoples. Translated from the German by
Tiele, C. P.
G. K. Nariman. Part 1, Bombay, 1912. A considerable portion of Part 2
in Asha, vol; 1, Nos. 1, 2, 6,7, 9-12. Karachi, 1910, 1911.
Vendidad, Vispered, Edited by F. Spiegel in Avesta Die Heiligen Schriften der Parsen.
Yasna, Pahlavi Texts. Wien, t853.
Pahlavi Text. Edited by Hoshang Jamasp. Bombay, 1907.
Vendidad.
Fragmente ueber die Religion des Zoroaster. Bonn, 1831.
Vullers, J. A.
The Message of Zoroaster. London, 1912.
Wadia, Ardaser S.
Die Keilinschriften de Achämeniden. Leipzig, 1911.
Weissbach, F. H.
Wesendonk, O. G. Urmench und Seele in der Iranischen Überlieferung. Hanover, 1924.
von.
The Parsi Religion. Bombay, 1843.
Wilson, John.
Die Persische Anahita oder Anaites. München, 1856.
Windischmann, Fr.
Mithra. Leipzig, 1857.
Windischmann, Fr.
Zoroastrische Studien. Berlin, 1863.
Windischmann, Fr.
Übersetzt
und Eingeleitet. von Hermann Lommel. Göttingen, 1927.
Yasht's des Awesta.
Pahlavi Text. Edited by B. N. Dhabhar. Bombay, 1927.
Zand-i Khurtak
Avistak.
Translated from the Pahlavi text by E. W. West. In Sacred Books of the
Zatsparam.
East, vol. 5.

[xxix]
ABBREVIATIONS
Aerpt.
= Aerpatastan.
AF.
= Arische Forschungen.
Air. Wb. = Altiranisches Wörterbuch (Bartholomae)
AnAtM.
= Andarz-i Atarpat-i Maraspand.
AnKhK.
= Andarz-i Khusru-i Kavatan.
Aog.
= Aogemadaecha.
Artax. Pers. = inscriptions of Artaxerxes at Persepolis.
AthV.
= Atharva Veda.
Av.
= Avesta.
AV.
= Arda Viraf.
AZ.
= Afrin-i Zartusht.
Bd.
= Bundahishn.
BH.
= Behistan.
bk.
= book.
BYt.
= Pahlavi Bahman Yasht.
= (confer), compare.
cf.
Dar. Alv. = inscriptions of Darius on Mt. Alvand (Elvend), near Hamadan.
Dar. Pers. = inscriptions of Darius at Persepolis.
Db.
= Dabistan.
Dd.
= Dadestan-i Denik.
Dk.
= Denkard.
ed.
= edition of, edited by.
Eng.
= English.
EpM.
= Epistles of Manushchihr.
ERE.
= Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics (Hastings).
FHG.
= Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum (Müller).
G.
= Gah.
GIrPh.
= Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie.
Gs.
= Ganj-i Shayikan.
Guj.
= Gujarati.
Hj.
= Hajiabad.
Hn.
= Hadokht Nask.
= (id est), that is.
i.e.
ibid.
= (ibidem), in the same work.
Is.
= Isaiah.
Jsp.
= Jamaspi.
JAOS.
= Journal of the American Oriental Society.
JRAS.
= Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.
KZ.
= Kuhn's Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Sprachforschung. [xxx]

Mkh.
NR.
Nr.
Ny.
Pers.
Pt.
Phl.
Rv.
RV.
SBE.
Sd.
SdBd.
Sg.
Skt.
Sr.
SlS.
TdFr.
tr.
Vd.
vers.
vol.
Vsp.
WFr.
Xerx. Pers.
Ys.
Yt.
ZDMG.
Zsp.

= Menog-i Khrad.
= inscriptions of Darius at Naksh-i Rustam.
= Nirangistan.
= Niyayesh.
= Persian.
= Patit.
= Pahlavi.
= Rivayat.
= Rig Veda.
= Sacred Books of the East.
= Sad Dar.
= Sad Dar Bundahishn.
= Shikand Gumanig Vizar.
= Sanskrit.
= Sirozah.
= Shayest-la-Shayest [Shayest-ne-Shayest]
= Tahmuras Fragment.
= translated by, translation of.
= Vendidad.
= version.
= volume.
= Visperad.
= Westergaard Fragment.
= inscriptions of Xerxes at Persepolis.
= Yasna.
= Yasht.
= Zeitschrift der Deutchen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft.
= Zadspram.

[xxxi]
Notes:
INTRODUCTION
Scope of the Work. This book is the revised and
much enlarged edition of my Zoroastrian Theology,
which has been out of print for the past fifteen years.
The publication of my Zoroastrian Civilization, and Our
Perfecting World, Zarathushtra's Way of Life, and
professional duties have delayed the completion of
the work. I have inserted new material in several
chapters and added nineteen new chapters to the
book. I have given a concise account of the religious
beliefs and practices prevalent among the
Zoroastrians and their early Iranian ancestors from
the pre-Gathic times to the present day and named
the book History of Zoroastrianism.
Arrangement and method. I have divided the entire
period of the history of Zoroastrianism on the
linguistic basis. The earliest Zoroastrian documents
are the Gathas, written in the Gathic dialect. They
represent the earliest phase of the religion of
Zoroaster. But ancient Iran had a religion which
preceded Zoroastrianism in point of time. I have
labelled this period pre-Gathic; for its beginning is
lost in remote antiquity, and the advent of Zoroaster
brings its end.
The time when Zoroaster flourished is a moot
question. The approximate date at which he lived is
1000 B.C. Zoroaster revolutionizes the religious life
of the Iranians, which hitherto represented the
evolutionary phase of religion. It was the movement
in which we find the religious thought creeping for

ages to rise from the lower to the higher level. To put
this in another way, the pre-Gathic religion of Iran is
the evolution of the religious thought of many men
and many ages; Zoroaster's is the creation of one man
and one age. The prophet of Iran establishes a new
religion. In the pre-Gathic religion the trend of
religious thought struggles from the complex to the
simple, from concrete to abstract, and is yet the
farthest removed from the ideal stage.
Zoroastrianism, on the other hand, as preached in the
Gathas is the very embodiment of the simple and the
abstract. It is the realization [xxxii] of the ideal. It is
the form to which the coming generations have to
conform. Deviation from it means a fall, a
degeneration of the religous life. This second period I
have termed Gathic.
Decay soon begins in the language in which
Zoroaster composed his immortal hymns, and his
successors now write in the Avestan dialect, which
replaces the Gathic. The Avestan language remains
the written language of the Zoroastrians from now
onward to probably the last days of the Parthians,
when the Pahlavi language becomes the court
language of the Sasanians and supersedes the
Avestan. The most extensive literature on
Zoroastrianism is written in Avestan. This period,
which I have called Later Avestan period, extends to
the early part of the Pahlavi era and goes even
beyond it. When the two periods thus overlap each
other, it often becomes difficult to determine
whether a certain phase of religious thought is on
one side or the other of the dividing line between
them. The Avestan works, in the form in which they
were written in the Avestan period, no longer exist.
They were scattered by the storm that swept over

Persia when Alexander conquered the country, and
shook her religious edifice to its base. The form in
which the Avestan texts have reached us is that
which was given them during the Pahlavi period. The
artists employed to restore the broken edifice belong
to the Pahlavi period, but the materials used come
down from the Avestan sources.
The Pahlavi period ranks fourth in the arrangement
of the present work, and it covers a period of about
eight centuries. Although it is most productive under
the Sasanian rule, it does not close with the collapse
of this, the last of the Zoroastrian empires, but
survives it by at least three centuries in Moslem
Persia. Though Pahlavi had replaced Avestan, the
early works written in the ancient language had not
yet ceased to influence the Pahlavi writers. In fact,
some of the most important of the Pahlavi works are
either versions of some Avestan works now lost to us,
or draw their thought from the Avestan sources.
Thus, the Pahlavi Bundahishn is the epitome of the
Avestan Damdat [Damdad] Nask, which is subsequently
lost. Similarly, not a few of the Pahlavi works written
two or three centuries after the conquest of Persia by
the Arabs tenaciously preserve the tradition handed
down by Sasanian Persia. These are characterized by
two layers of thought, one traditional, and the other
representing new [xxxiii] thought current during the
writer's times. The Menuk-i Khrat, for example, betrays
Moslem influence when it preaches fatalism, but is
otherwise faithfully voicing the sentiments of the
orthodox Sasanian Church. This interweaving of old
ideas with the new ones, and the interpolations and
additions of the later writers in the works of earlier
generations, often make it hopeless to disentangle the
complications and distinguish between the opinions

and ideas of different periods.
Thirteen hundred years have elapsed since the
dissolution of the last of the Zoroastrian empires.
Henceforth we have to record the religious history of
the Zoroastrian remnants in Persia and the
Zoroastrian settlers of India. Zoroastrianism sinks
with the Zoroastrian power, and a long period of
obscurity follows. I have named it a period of
decadence.
Under the aegis of the British rule in India
Zoroastrianism emerges once again with the
prosperity of the Parsi community. I have hailed this
as the period of the revival of Zoroastrianism.
These various periods, which represent
chronologically different stages of the historical
development of the religious thought of Iran, from
remote antiquity down to the immediate present,
will, I hope, give the reader a general and
comprehensive view of the history of Zoroastrian
religion. As the subjects are treated piece-meal in
different periods according to the natural growth of
ideas from period to period, the reader will have to
read crosswise when he needs a complete account of
any particular concept. For example, if he wants to
know all that the Zoroastrian literature has to say
about Ormazd [Ohrmazd], he will get it as a whole
not from any one period, but from all. The detailed
list of contents and the index will help him in his
inquiry.
Transliteration of the technical terms. I have sought
to preserve the changes that these have undergone
during successive periods, and have variously
transliterated them in the treatment of the different

periods, according as they represent the Avestan,
Pahlavi, or Persian pronunciations. Thus, for
example, Ahura Mazda of the Gathic and Avestan
periods become Ormazd [Ohrmazd] in the Pahlavi
period. Angra Mainyu assumes the form Ahriman in
the subsequent periods. The Avestan Vohu Manah
changes into Pahlavi Vohuman and into Bahman in
Persian. In the frequent use of the name of the
prophet, I have, however, not scrupulously followed
this method. I have distinguished between the
Avestan, [xxxiv] Pahlavi, and Persian forms by
writing Zarathushtra for the first, and Zaratusht for
Pahlavi and Zartusht [Zartosht] for Persian as they
actually occur in these languages; but I have adopted
the more familiar form Zoroaster for general use.
Similarly, I have called the religion of the prophet
Zoroastrianism. With a view to simplicity for the
general reader, I have avoided, as far as it has been
practicable, the free use of diacritical marks, and have
employed simple transcriptions of the names of the
heavenly beings persons, and books when they occur
in the text.
*********
I am grateful to Dr. Charles J. Ogden who has
carefully revised the greater part of the proofsheets
and favoured me with his scholarly criticism.
[1]
PRE-GATHIC PERIOD
FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO ABOUT 1000 B.C.
[2 is blank]
[3]

HISTORY OF ZOROASTRIANISM
Notes:
CHAPTER I
THE SOURCES
The data of information. The materials that we
gather for the preparation of the history of the
religion that Zarathushtra preached in Ancient Iran
come from varied sources. The earliest native records
are embodied in the sacred texts in which the
prophet and his immediate disciples propounded the
new religion. These are furnished by the Avestan
literature, which is followed by the Pahlavi and
Pazend [Pazand] works and finally by the writings in
Modern Persian down to the end of the eighteenth
century.
Peoples of diverse faiths and nationalities have
likewise, written about Zoroaster and his teachings
from the earliest to the modern times. Greeks and
Romans and Christians in the Occident and Indians,
Hebrews, Arabs, Syrians, Armenians, and Chinese in
the Orient have contributed to the fund of
information on the subject. Zarathushtra has founded
a new religion and we shall begin with the
consideration of the materials used in the foundation,
which are to be gleaned from the Avesta, the earliest
literature produced by Iran.
The Avestan Nasks. Tradition credits Zarathushtra
with having written profusely. Pliny states that the
great philosopher Hermippus, who flourished in the
early part of third century before the Christian era,
had studied some 2,000,000 verses composed by
Zoroaster.1 The Arabic historians Tabari and Masudi

1. HN. 30. 2. 1.
2. Annales, 1. 675;
Masudi, ed. Barbiei de
Meynard. 2.123.

state that the Zoroastrian texts were copied on
3. Dk., vol 9, p. 577.
12,000 cowhides.2 Parsi tradition speaks of twentyone Nasks or volumes written by Zarathushtra.
4. Diodorus,17.72;
These, we are informed, dealt with religion,
Curtius,5.7; Dk.,
philosophy, ethics, medicine, and various sciences. vol.9, p. 569.
King Vishtaspa ordered two archetype copies of
these sacred texts and [4] deposited them in the
5. Dk., vol. 9, p. 569.
3
libraries of Dizh-i Nipisht and Ganj-i Shapigan. One
of these copies perished in the flames when
Alexander burned the royal palace at Persepolis.4 The
other copy, tradition maintains, was taken by the
conquering hordes to their own country, where it was
rendered into Greek.5
The collection of the scattered texts was begun under
the last of the Arsacids and completed in the early
Sasanian period. The twenty-one original Avestan
Nasks were artificially made to correspond to the
twenty-one words of the Ahuna Vairya formula. The
holy Manthra is made up of three lines and the
twenty-one Nasks were, likewise, divided into three
equal parts of seven each to correspond with them.
These three divisions are classified under the
headings: Gasanik, that is, pertaining to the Gathas
or devotional hymns, the Hadha Mansarik, which as
Dinkard [Denkard]6 says, is intermediary between the
Gathik and the last division, namely the Datik, which
is that pertaining to law.7 It is estimated that the
twenty-one volumes contained about 345,700 words
of written text.8

6. DK8, 1, 7.
7. See Geldner, Avesta
Literature, tr. by
Mackichan in Avesta,
Pahlavi, and Ancient
Persian Studies in honour
of Dastur Peshotanji B
Sanjana, p. 31.
8. See West in SBE.,
vol. 37, Introd. p. 45.

This canonical compilation has suffered heavily
during the last thirteen centuries since the downfall
9. See Geldner, ib., p.
of the last Zoroastrian empire in the seventh century.
30.
The entire collection of the Avestan texts that has
reached us consists of about 83,000 words,9 that is,

about one-fourth of the original twenty-one Nasks.
The Vendidad is the one Nask that has survived the
ravages of time in its Complete form. Some of the
lost Nasks are preserved in part in the Yasna, Yashts,
and Nirangistan. We shall draw upon this A vestan
material in our discussion of the Gathic and A vestan
periods.
The Pahlavi, Pazend, and Persian sources. During
the chaos that prevailed in Iran after the downfall of
the Achaemenian empire, the Avestan language
began to decay. When it grew unintelligible to the
people, the learned priests undertook translations and
explanations of the Avestan texts into Pahlavi, [5] the
new language which originated during the period.
These commentaries on the original Avestan texts are
called âzainti in Avesta, and zand in Pahlavi. The
explanatory texts now came to be known as Avastaku Zand or the Avesta and the commentaries. Pahlavi
was the court language of the Sasanians and it
survived the downfall of their empire by at least three
centuries. Extensive Pahlavi literature that came into 10. See West.
existence under the Sasanians has mostly perished.
GIrPh.2. 90, 91.
The works that have reached us were written after
the downfall of the Sasanian empire, mostly during
the Abbasid period. The compilation of the most
important work of the period, the Dinkard
[Denkard], for example, was commenced by the
learned high-priest Atarfarnbarg Farokhzad in the
beginning of the ninth century and completed by one
of his successors, Adarbad Hemed, towards the end
of the ninth century. The Dinkard [Denkard], Vijirkard-i
Dinik, and the Persian Rivayets give us summaries of the
lost Nasks. We gather from the contents of the lost
Nasks given in the Dinkard [Denkard] that, with the
exception of the eleventh Nask, altogether twenty

Avestan Nasks, nineteen along with their Pahlavi
commentaries and one without it, still existed in the
ninth century. The greater part of these works has
perished during the unsettled times when Persia fell
under the barbarous rule of the Tartars. Pahlavi works
on religious subjects that are extant consist of about
446,000 words.10
With the invention of the modern Persian alphabet,
Pahlavi fell into the background. An admixture of
Aryan and Semitic make-up the Pahlavi language as
written. It was later simplified by the elimination of
all Semitic words and replacing them with their
Iranian equivalents. The original Avestan texts were
explained and interpreted by the Pahlavi commentary
which, as we saw, was called Zand. A further need
was felt to make explanatory versions of the Pahlavi
texts themselves. This further explanation and added
commentary is called Pazand from the Avestan word
paiti zainti. Short benedictory prayers are composed in
Pazend [Pazand] as supplementary prayers to the
original Avestan prayers, The Pazend [Pazand] texts
were written in Avestan script. With the introduction
of the Arabic script in Persia, the Pahlavi script fell
into disuse.
Zoroastrian works came to be written in the modern
Persian [6] alphabet. A considerable literature, both
in prose and poetry, has sprung up during the last
11. See West. GIrPh.
seven centuries in Persian on Zoroastrian subjects.11
2. 122-129.
The Pahlavi and Pazend [Pazand] works originated in
Persia, whereas both Persia and India contributed in
the production of the Persian works.
Parsi-Sanskrit and Gujarati sources. An Indian
school of Parsi Sanskritists of the thirteenth century,

headed by Neryosang Dhaval, has translated some
parts of the Avestan texts into Sanskrit from their
Pahlavi version. Besides these, they have left for us
the Sanskrit translation of a few Pahlavi works.
A considerable literature, in prose and verse, has
appeared in Gujarati on Zoroastrian subjeccts in
India. A Gujarati version of the Yasna and Vendidad
and two renderings of the Khordah Avesta were
published in the beginning of the nineteenth century,
that is, before the influence of Western scholarship
penetrated into India. Works written in Gujarati
continue to be published to the present day.
Oriental sources. The Indo-Iranians shared a
common religious heritage, and the Rig Veda
furnishes us with the earliest sacred texts that are
helpful in the better understanding of the religious
beliefs of the pre-Gathic, Gathic, and the Younger
Avestan periods of the history of Zoroastrianism.
There are, likewise, scattered passages in the Vedas,
Brahmanas, Smriti, and Puranas that refer to the
Iranians and their religion. Judaism under the Exile
was influenced by Zoroastrian teachings and
furnishes us with points of resemblance between the
angelology, demonology, and eschatology of the
Iranians and the Hebrews. The Armenian historians
Moses of Khoren and Elisaeus, the theologians Eznik
and the Syrian Theodore bar Khoni, the Acts and
Passions of Persian Saints and Martyrs, works written
by Zoroastrian converts to Christianity, the Syriac,
Armenian, Judaic, and Christian polemic literature
against Zoroastrianism, and the writings of the
Mandaeans are full of views held by those who
opposed the state religion of Persia during the
Sasanian period. A host of Arabic and Mohammedan
Persian writers from the days of Ibn Khurdadhbah

(A.D 816) and al-Baladhuri (A.D. 851), al-Biruni
(A.D. 973-1048), al-Shahrastani (A.D. 1086-1153),
to Yakut (A.D. 1250), Kazwini (A.D. 1263),
Mirkhond (A.D. 1432-1498) and Mohsan Fani (A.D.
1600-1670) give valuable [7] information on our
subject. There are stray passages in Chinese literature
with reference to the religious beliefs and practices of
the Zoroastrians.
Occidental sources. The contact of Persia with
Greece began in the fifth century B.C. under the
Achaemenians. It continued with Rome up to the
middle of the seventh century A.D., to the last days
of the Sasanians. Ktesias was the court physician of
king Artaxerxes II. Xanthus and Herodotus began to
acquaint their readers with ihe manners and customs
and religious beliefs of the Persians. Hermippus (B.C.
250) is said to have studied the writings of
Zarathushtra. Theopompus and Hermippus are the
two writers upon whose writings on Persian religion
the later writers have drawn considerably. Plutarch
was familiar with the lost work of Theopompus and
gives useful information on his authority, Diogenes
Laertius says that Aristotle was familiar with the
theory of Persian dualism. Plutarch, Strabo, and a few
others write from their personal observation. Cicero,
Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus, and other Roman
writers continued to write about Persia up to the
Middle Ages. The writings of the earlier classical
authors throw special light upon the religious beliefs
and practices of the Achaemenians.
Inscriptions, coins, and tablets as the last source of
information. The Old Persian Inscriptions with their
Babylonian and New Elamitic renderings found at
Behistan, Persepolis, Naqsh-i Rustam, Elvand, Susa,
Kerman, and Suez; the Babylonian, Egyptian, and

Greek inscriptions, together with the works of the
ancient classical writers, furnish us with information
about the religious beliefs and practices of the
Achaemenians. The Pahlavi inscriptions, likewise,
add to our knowledge of the religious life of the
Sasanian period. The names of about ten Zoroastrian
Amesha Spentas and Yazatas that appear on the coins
of Indo-Scythic rulers of Northwestern India in
Greek characters and the epigraphic texts in
Babylonian, Egyptian, and Greek contribute to the
information that we get about Zoroastrianism from
varied sources.
[8]
CHAPTER II
AIRYANA-VAEJAH
The Stem-land of the Aryans. The problem of the
cradle of the Aryan race will probably never be
solved with' certainty. Airyana-vaejah, 'the stem-land
of the Aryans,' is spoken of as the first of the good
lands created by Ahura Mazda.1 It had a mild and
genial climate, with long, pleasant summers and short
winters. Unlike Indian Yama, who chose the realm of
the dead and established his suzerainty in the
heavenly world, Yima was the illustrious king who
ruled over men and beasts and converted his
kingdom into a veritable paradise upon earth.
Animals and mankind prospered and grew in such
large numbers in his memorable reign, which
tradition has subsequently regarded as the Golden
Age of Iran, that the country could no longer hold
them. Ahura Mazda, thereupon, bade him to lead his
overflowing population to migrate southwards, on
the way of the sun. Yima carried out the divine

1. Vd. 1.3.
2. Vd. 2.9-19.
3. Vd. 2.21.
4. Vd. 2.22-24.

behest and yet the difficulty was not solved, for the
numbers kept on increasing steadily. The king
organized a second migration again towards the
south and still a third in the same direction.2
Moreover, the happy home of the Aryans was
destined to be further disturbed, Ahura Mazda knew
this through his omniscience and he called a
conference of the angels and summoned Yima to
attend it with the best of his men.3 He then warned
the king that Angra Mainyu, the enemy of God and
men, contemplated invasion of Airyana-vaejah. He
would cause evil winter to fall that would bring
fierce, deadly frost. Such dense desolation would
follow the icy deluge that every vestige of human
habitation would disappear and it would be a wonder
if even a footprint of a sheep could be seen.4 Angra
Mainyu did invade the happy home of the Aryans
and plagued it with a deluge of snow and ice.
Forewarned by Ahura Mazda, the mighty king took
timely measures, and before Angra Mainyu [9] cause
destruction and death, through deadly deluge, or, in
the language of geology, before the glacial cataclysm
rendered the primeval Aryan home unfit for
habitation, he led a further successful migration
towards the hospitable south.
The Indo-Europeans. This virile race, white in
colour and fair of complexion, called itself Aryan or
noble. It was the parent of the Indo-European
peoples of history, These members of the Aryan
family lived long as a homogeneous people speaking
the same language with dialectic differences and
shared many beliefs and practices in common.
Pressure of growing population, thirst for adventure,
sharp divisions caused by the fermentation going on
in the minds of thinking persons over religious beliefs

and practices continued to disintegrate them. During
the early part of the second millennium B.C., nomad
tribes left their home and turned westwards and
reached the Aegean lands or turned southwards in
successive waves from the steppes of the Caspian Sea.
Scattered tribes passed by the chain of Caucasus,
entered Armenia and spread southwards. Some of the
more virile tribes succeeded in founding small Aryan
kingdoms. They have left traces of their Aryan beliefs
and practices. The Kassites, who rose to power in the
Zagros in 1700 B.C., designated godhead by the
Indo-European term bugash, Av. baga, Skt. bhaga, Slav.
bogu, Phrygian, bagaios, and worshipped Suryash, Skt.
surya, the sun, as their chief god. The Mitannis, who
founded an Aryan empire between the Euphrates and
the Tigris, have left behind them the record of their
own names, such as Dushratta, Artatama, and the
names of the Aryan divinities Mitra, Indra, Varuna,
and Nasatya in an inscription dating 14th century
B.C. at Boghaz-Keui. The trend of migration
continued until We see the Aryan Medes at a later
date facing the Semitic Assyrians as their immediate
neighbours.
The Indo-Iranians. The other migratory wave
extended earlier towards the Elburz [Alburz] range
and to the southern belt of the Caspian an Sea and
took the tastward course. The Vendidad opens the
enumeration of the sixteen good places created by
Ahura Mazda, ranging between Airyana-vaejah in the
5. Vd1.1-20.
north and Hapta Hindu or Sapta Sindhu, the land of
seven (later five) rivers, the Panjaub.5 The names of
these lands may not be taken as marking [10] the
successive stages of the Aryan migration showing the
people leaving their original habitat, descending
downwards through the Caucasus, crossing the

Elburz [Alburz] range, entering eastern Iran or
modern Afghanistan, passing the Hindukush and
terminating their peregrinations in Sapta Sindhu. But
the test may be taken as recording historicogeographical reminiscence on the part of the writers
of the south-eastward migration of the Aryan race.
Of the various sections of the Aryan family, the
ancestors of those that later became known in history
as the Indians and the Iranians lived longest and
closest together in eastern Iran. They sacrificed to
the same gods and entertained the same view of life
upon earth. They separated at a later period and a
group turned towards the south, crossed the
Hindukush and entered the Panjaub by about 2000
B.C.
The great Aryan family thus dispersed during several
generations and the members sought out for
themselves new settlements in Asia and Europe. Of
the various groups that separated from the main stock
at different times, the Iranian group preserved most
faithfully the original name of the primeval home of
the Aryans. The place of residence had changed, the
surroundings had altered beyond recognition, and
the communities that lived and shared life with them
had gone. But the deeply cherished name Airyanavaejah had been indelibly imprinted on their minds.
The veneration for the stem-land lived, the memory
of its paradisaic condition still lingered, the
auspicious name Airyana-vaejah continued still to be
passionately loved, and the Iranians resolved that
their latest settlement should be known for ever by
no other name than Airyana vaejah of happy
memory.

[11]
THE GATHIC PERIOD
ABOUT 1000 B.C.
[12 is blank]
[13]
Notes:
CHAPTER III
ZARATHUSHTRA
Zarathushtra doubts to know. Prophets are gods in
the flesh, and Zarathushtra, the prophet of Iran, was
such a man-god. His date of birth, as we shall see in
subsequent chapters, is placed anywhere between 600
B.C. and 6000 B.C. It is an uncontested fact that
there is a marked closeness between the grammar,
metre, and style of the Rig Veda and the Gathas. The
Gathic inflexions are more primitive than the Vedic.
The period of the position of the Gathas, therefore,
cannot be separated from the Vedas by any
considerable distance of time. Zarathushtra's place of
birth is of equal uncertainty. His earliest appearance
in the Gathas is at the period of his life when he has
left his pupilage behind. He has evidently learnt all
he could from what the teachers of his days could
give him. He has conversed with the wise men of his
country. He has often visited the central places
where trade routes from distant lands converged and
has gathered information and experience from the
worldly-wise travellers, merchants, and pilgrims. But

the more he has learnt, the more eager his desire to
learn further has grown. His teachers had instructed
him in knowledge based on tradition. But tradition is
stagnant, and knowledge is ever on the onward move.
Besides, tradition is wedded to the time that is dead,
and knowledge looks to the time to be born without
end. Moreover, tradition demands its instruction to
be taken on trust, and knowledge is based on inquiry
and discussion. Reason is shadowed by doubt and
doubt is the parent of knowledge. Zarathushtra, a
paragon of reason, doubts the wisdom of his teachers.
Zarathushtra resolves to be his own teacher, and to
learn by observation and thinking. He thinks and
thinks deeply and comprehensively on the conditions
prevailing around him. He considers that life is not
woven of the tissues of joy and happiness alone, but
of considerable sorrow and misery also. Injustice and
inequity, strife and oppression, poverty and
destitution, greed [14] and avarice, wrath and rapine,
falsehood and deceit, envy and malice, hatred and
jealousy, crime and vice, sorrow and suffering, filth
and disease confront him everywhere. He is keenly
responsive to human sufferings and the groans and
sighs of the agonized hearts. The misery of the
multitude touches his heart. His flesh creeps, his
heart is heavily oppressed, and his spirit is depressed
at the sight of this dark side of human life. He suffers
at the sight of suffering and, with eyes suffused with
tears, he lives from day unto day thinking and
brooding over the woes of the world. Zarathushtra
doubts the goodness of gods.
He is religious at heart, but his daily experience of
the religion practised and lived around him tends to
estrange him from the faith of his forefathers. He sees
with horror temples reeking with the blood of

sacrifical animals. He finds that barren formalism,
sanctimonious scrupulosity, meticulous ablutions,
superstitious fear, and display of external holiness
pass for religion. Zarathushtra doubts the religion of
his birth.
Zarathushtra seeks silent, solitary seclusion.
Solitude is nature's sublime temple where spirit can
commune with spirit in the surrounding silence and
unruffled calm. Mountains lift their heads
majestically on the Iranian plateau, and Zarathushtra
retreated into the mountain fastness. Here, far
removed from the stress and strife of life, and with no
human sound to distract his thoughts, he made his
home. He breathed the refreshing air. The twittering
and chirping and whistling and singing of birds filled
the air. Here the earth and waters, birds and beasts,
sun and moon, stars and planets worked as his
teachers. He read some lesson, some message written
by the hand of the maker of all on every pebble and
every leaf, every dewdrop and every sunbeam, in
every star and every planet. Here he plunged into a
reverie or gazed into vacancy. The calm atmosphere
is conducive to communion, and here, in the
monastic void; he communed with nature which
inspired solemn thoughts in him. He communed with
his mind and he communed with his inner self. He
thought and he reasoned, he cogitated and he
contemplated, he mused and he dreamed. He
meditated upon the essence of divinity, the anomalies
of life, and the human destiny after death. Here in
this great and glorious temple of nature, built by
divine hands, his eyes of spirit saw what the eyes of
flesh could not see. Here in the sublime sanctuary
spoke the solemn voice of [15] the divine vicar and
he heard it. Zarathushtra's creative mind evolved the

highest conception of godhead, whom he named
Ahura Mazda or the Wise Lord.
Zarathushtra yearns to see Ahura Mazda.
Zarathushtra has prepared himself through the wise
discipline of mind and heart and through the life of
piety to receive his message from Mazda. He longs
for the moment when, being enlightened in mind, he
shall visualize Vohu Manah or Good Mind, Asha or
Righteousness, Sraosha, the embodiment of
Obedience to divine commandments, and the
sublime seat of beneficent Ahura.1 Mind alone can
understand and realize the supreme mind and
Zarathushtra longs to approach Mazda through Vohu
Manah.2 Mind is the repository both of knowledge
upon which rests the enlightenment of life, and pure
thoughts which form the basis of good conduct. He
developed this dual aspect of mind to a prominent
degree and prayed that Vohu Manah might bless him
with his presence.3 He had not long to wait, for Vohu 10. Y28.3; 43.8.
Manah, he who impersonates the divine mind, one
day came to him and inquired who he was and to
whom he belonged and what he wished for.4 Seeing
Vohu Manah, Zarathushtra got a glimpse of Ahura
Mazda, whom he now conceived as holy, and for the
first time felt himself acquainted with the words of
wisdom.5 When his ardent desire to meet Vohu
Manah is fulfilled he now aspires through him to
greet Ahura Mazda himself.6 His one consuming
passion now is to see Mazda face to face and hold
communion with him,7 so that he may have the most
comprehensive understanding of the divinity. He
desires and yearns and prays that Mazda may
vouchsafe unto him his heart's longing. Devotion for
Mazda wells up in his heart, and he is filled with the
divine spirit. He feels himself lifted above the earth,

and in his supreme moments of transcendent ecstasy
he has the beatific vision of Mazda.6 He has now
found Mazda and he pours out his devout heart at his
feet. He longs to be alone with him, belong wholly
to him, and live in his love and attachment.9 He
praises him, worships him, makes songs of devotion
to him, he yearns to weave his personality with
Mazda like the warp and woof, and he longs [16] to
lose himself in the divine bosom.10 His whole life is
bound up in one idea: Ahura Mazda.
Zarathushtra longs to commune with Ahura Mazda.
Zarathushtra has thought out many problems of life
but he is still unsatisfied with his discoveries. He has
doubts on many points,11 and who but Mazda can
solve them satisfactorily? He asks Mazda for whom
has he created the weal-dispensing cattle,12 who has
marked out the path of the sun and the stars, by
whom does the moon wax and wane,13 who has
yoked swiftness to winds and clouds, who withholds
the earth and the sky from falling down, who made
the waters and the trees,14 what artificer made light
and darkness and wakefulness and sleep, who made
the dawn and the day and the night that remind man
of the intelligence of his duty,15 who is the creator of
Good Mind,16 who formed the blessed devotion in
the divine kingdom and who with wisdom made the
son dutiful to his father,17 how should devotion
embrace those to whom his religion is proclaimed,18
whether devotion furthered righteousness through
deeds,19 how was the prayer to be addressed to him,20
who was righteous and who was wicked, with whom
did the enemy of all side and who was like unto him,
was not the person that repudiated Mazda's
beneficence himself the enemy,21 how was the
wickedness of those who ran counter to the rules of

11. Y48.9.
12. Y44.6.
13. Y44.3.
14. Y44.4.
15. Y44.5.
16. Y44.4.
17. Y44.7.
18. Y44.11.
19. Y44.6.
20. Y44.1.
21. Y44.12.
22. Y44.13.
23. Y44.14.

righteousness and good thought to be put down,22
how was wickedness to be brought into the hands of
righteousness,23 who would gain victory when the
powers of righteousness and wickedness came to
grips,24 who would smite victoriously the enemy with
the mighty words of Mazda,25 how would
recompense to the righteous and retribution to the
wicked be accorded at the reckoning,26 how the best
existence was to be won,27 would the divine kingdom
be made known to God's faithful through Good
Mind,28 what were the ordinances of Mazda,29 how
should he, Zarathushtra, approach Mazda with
love,30 with what goodness would his soul win
felicity,31 and many such questions pertaining to the
way of life. He felt Mazda's inspiring [17] presence
within him, he heard his whispers. Mazda spoke
through his mind and he was enlightened. He sought
instruction from Mazda and had now acquired it.32

24. Y44.15.
25. Y44.16.
26. Y31.14;
27. Y44.2.
28. Y44.6.
29. Y34.12;
30. Y44.17.
31. Y44.8.
32. Y45.6.

Zarathushtra is filled with an intense fervour of
enthusiasm for prophetic work. The work of
prophetic preparation was now completed.
Zarathushtra was girt with wisdom and righteousness.
He had heard, comprehended, and made his own the 33. Y29.8.
message of Mazda and was now ready to convey it to
mankind. One phase of his life had now ended. He 34. Y43.11.
was now ready to leave the life of seclusion and turn
towards the clamour and clatter of town traffic and 35. Y28.4; 50.11.
live in the midst of the sight and sound of throbbing
human life. He had a new mission, a new hope, a new 36. Y44.10.
way of life to regenerate the world. Mankind was
37. Y31.3.
steeped in the slough of despair and despondency,
helplessness and hopelessness. He was to be the
bearer of the message of hope to mankind and
salvage it. He was to wean the hearts of men and
women from wickedness, to lead them on the path of

righteousness, to assuage the sufferings of humanity,
to establish a new social order, and to found a new
moral world. He was burning with zeal to embark
upon his great mission. He was the chosen of Mazda,
who now speaks with sublime satisfaction that
Zarathushtra alone among mankind had heard his
divine commands and having heard them was now
going to make them heard among all mankind,
therefore he was bestowing on him elegance of
speech.33 The great work that he had now to
undertake of propagating his new religion and
winning people for it would be beset with untold
obstacles and hardships and Zarathushtra realizes it.34
But the messenger of Mazda is determined to face
them and overcome them and emerge triumphant in
the end. He tells Mazda that he will lead mankind on
the path of righteousness and sing untiringly his
praise all around as long as his life is blessed with
power and strength.35 He speaks of his faith in terms
of a universal religion. He is convinced that the
religion that Ahura Mazda has commissioned him to
preach is the best for all mankind.36 He looks forward
to winning all living men for the faith of Ahura
Mazda.37
But the ardent desire of the prophet was not to be
fulfilled [18] at the moment, nor to be accomplished
in full measure in after ages. Though possessed of all
the best elements that fitted it to be a world creed,
Zoroastrianism has never shown any signs of
becoming a universal religion. In the midst of the
vicissitudes of fortune, it has been a national religion
at best. Little short of a miracle has saved it from
total extinction, and various causes have combined to
reduce it to the narrowest limits today as the
communal religion of a hundred and twenty-five

thousand souls. This fact will be brought out more
prominently in the treatment of the religious
development during the subsequent periods.
People marvel at the new prophet. Zarathushtra
turned his steps to his place of birth and childhood.
His kinsfolk and friends recognized him and yet they
were bewildered to witness a marvellous change in
him. He was of course grown in years and stature. But
there was something indescribable that those who
saw him could not realize. His face had grown sweet
and serene. It breathed ineffable kindness and bore
shining reflection of his pure inner life. It wore the
expression of gentleness and cheerfulness, hope and
confidence. A resplendent halo of righteousness
encircled his magnetic face. He moved among people
with a friendly look and a kindly word to all. His
moral grandeur struck awe unto those who came near
him. The sublimity of his serene behaviour, the
childlike simplicity of his speech, the unassuming
attitude of his movements, the imperturbable calm
and passive countenance aroused feelings of
reverence in those who met him. They greeted him
with salutations and adoration. His advent soon
became the event of surrounding villages. All eagerly
pointed to him and talked abour him. In dumb
veneration people gazed at him, admired him, adored
him, and marvelled at him. He was Zarathushtra of
the Spitamas, they said, yet he was altogether a novel
personality. He was of them and yet above them, he
was akin to them and yet unlike them. He spoke
unheard of words, he talked of unknown things. He
was what they were not. They were but men, he was
greater than man, he was an angel, he was a godling.
Zarathushtra definitely breaks with the religion of
his forefathers. Zarathushtra has seen by this time

that there were some people who were anxious to
hear what he had to say. He now began to give
lengthy talks on subjects of great importance to his
eager listeners. He saw that he could sway and draw
the [19] hearts of his hearers to himself. He gave
forth publicly that he came from his maker Ahura
Mazda, whom he declared to be incomparably
greater than the gods they had so far known. This
great God had sent him as his chosen prophet to
preach a nobler religion than the one they followed.
Their priests had laid great emphasis on outward
observances and carried rules for rituals to meticulous
casuistry. Their gods were fond of sacrificial offerings
of animals and birds. Religion, preached
Zatathushtra, did not consist in a scrupulous
observance of outward forms, but was based mainly
upon the heart. A broken heart and a contrite spirit
were the choicest sacrifices that the faithful could
offer to their creator. Burning tears of a penitent
heart were better than a cupful of oblations. The aim
and object and end of the religion that Mazda had
commissioned him to teach was righteous conduct.
His worship was founded on righteousness. Genuine
piety is of the heart and its outward expressions are
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds. The
beliefs and practices of his hearers were
irreconcilably alien from what he taught. His
outspoken utterances created diverse effects upon
those who flocked to hear him daily. Some felt
themselves moved and influenced by them.
There were others among his hearers who had
approached him specially with the intention of
finding out his views without rousing his attention to
their ill-will. They took alarming reports to their
associates. They saw danger ahead of them. They

waited and watched, suspected and spied. They were
adroitly prepared themselves to face the ominous
situation; and they had not to be long in waiting.
Signs of disapprobation, whispers of disapproval,
murmurs of indignation now appeared in various
threatened to break out in open revolt.
The hostile Daevayasnian priests. The priests of the
ancient faith were now alarmed. They attempted to
dissuade the prophet from disturbing the peace of the
people. They met often to argue with him on the
questions he was raising, but were foiled in the
controversies.38 They felt themselves humiliated
before the people and gave up meeting the prophet.
They began to work against him and tried in all
possible manners to frustrate the effect he was daily
producing upon his hearers. They were accustomer to
fatten upon the profits of the elaborate ceremonials
[20] and rich sacrifices that people offered under
their guidance. They were renowned as exorcists who
38. Y30.6.
cast out demons, who read dreams, prognosticated
the future, warded off the effect of the evil eye and,
39. Y45.1.
with ingenious charlatanism, had prospered among
the credulous and superstitious. Zarathushtra
reproved their greed and avarice. He exhorted the
people to give up these superstitious practices and
warned them that they were causing great harm by
following such false teachers.39 His denunciation of
their practices made them furious and now they
sought his ruin. They accused him of preaching
doctrines that were subversive of the religion of their
forefathers and the established form of worship, and
of blaspheming their gods. They incited the people
to oppose him and made frantic appeals to the rulers
of the land to drive him out from their midst.

Zarathushtra's heart was burning with indignation
against these hypocrisies. With his holy spirit aglow
with righteous wrath, he called these Pharisees and
Scribes of Iran, Kavis and Karapans or seeingly blind
and hearingly deaf. These terms belong to the IndoIranian period and were evidently used in a good
sense, before the Aryan groups separated. They share
the fate of the cardinal word daeva and are assigned
derogatory meaning in the Gathas. The Vedic hymns
use the word kavi in the sense of a sage. It is freely
applied to the seers and to Soma priests. It is further
used as an epithet of gods. Agni, in particular, bears
40. RV. 2. 23. 1;
this honoured title.40 In the Gathas the word is
3.14.1.
curiously used with a double meaning. It is given a
bad connotation whenever it is applied to the priests
41. Y46.14; 51.16;
of the Daeva-worshippers. But the second Iranian
53.2.
dynasty is known as the Kavi or Kianian [Kayanian].
Its renowned kings who lived before the coming of
Zarathushtra were Kavi Kavata, Kavi Usa, and Kavi
Haosrava. Even Vishtaspa, who later became the
royal patron of the new religion, retains this title and
Zarathushtra speaks of him as Kavi Vishtaspa.41 It is
significant, however, that Vishtaspa is the last king
who shares this epithet with his royal predecessors.
The kings who succeed him and with whom the
dynasty dies out do not share the title. To the class of
the Kavi belong the Karapan, corresponding to Skt.
kalpa, 'ritual,' and the Usij, Skt. ushijah.
[21] These heretical priests give the cattle to
violence,42 they mislead mankind by their evil
teachings and bring destruction to them and their
cattle, but the prophet knows that they will face
ruin,43 and in the end their own corrupt consciences
will condemn them to eternal damnation.44 Through
the drunken orgies they and the wicked lords of the

42. Y44.20.
43. Y32.15.
44. Y31.20; 46.11;
51.14.

land who follow them cause misery to all around
them, and Zarathushtra implores Ahura Mazda to put
down their evil.45 The bitterest foe of Zarathushtra
who opposes him and thwarts his work is Bendva,
who does not himself embrace righteousness and
incites others to follow his lead. Zarathushtra invokes
Mazda to overthrow this chieftain from power.46
Grehma is another powerful Kavi who always
intrigues for Zarathushtra's undoing.47 Mazda
denounces him and his evil associates, for their
teachings lead to the destruction of the life of cattle
and they lead others to wickedness.48 This wicked
leader will bewail his evil fate and repent that he did
not accept Zarathushtra's message, when at the end
of his wicked life his soul will be consigned to the
worst abode of woe.49 Usij is yet another class of the
false priests who work violence to cattle and
husbandry.50

45. Y48.10.
46. Y49.1, 2.
47. Y32.14.
48. Y32.12.
49. Y32.13.
50. Y44.20.

51. Y32.9.
These evil teachers, complains Zarathushtra,
misinterpret the doctrines that he preaches and
52. Y32.4.
deceive people.51 They are devoid of goodness of
mind and heart and are the beloved of the Daevas.52
They defraud mankind of the happiness of both the 53. Y32.5.
worlds.53 Like the Daevas whom they follow, they are
known throughout the seven regions of the earth as 54. Y32.3.
the offspring of Evil Thought, Lie, and Arrogance.54
They persecute the righteous and desolate their
55. Y32.10, 11.
55
pastures. Those who strengthen the hands of such
false leaders given over to wickedness incur Ahura's 56. Y31.15.
displeasure.56 Zarathushtra exhorts all not to listen to
the words and commands of the liars who bring
57. Y31.18.
misery and destruction to the house and clan, district
and country, but to resist them with all their might.57 58. Y34.8.
These persons who do not embrace Righteousness
and Good Thought are Zarathushtra's enemies. They 59. Y46.7, 8.

are [22] powerful and they strive to frighten
60. Y51.10.
Zarathushtra who is weak.58 He looks to Ahura
Mazda for protection against them and prays that
instead of causing him harm, their hostile actions
may recoil upon themselves.59 The enmity and hatred
towards the prophet, however, increase day by day
and he is now aware that the opponents are bent
upon doing him the utmost harm that they can, that
is, they conspire to kill him.60
The Kavis and Karapans carried on vehement counter
propaganda against Zarathushtra. They persuaded,
denounced, cajoled, flattered, and threatened in one
breath those that showed signs of being influenced
by the new doctrines. They terrorized them with
excommunication from society, and with persecution
in this life and tortures awaiting them in the next life.
People dreaded their power and were not yet swayed
so completely by the new teachings as to face
persecution. The history of religions teaches us that a
new religion does not spread through well-balanced
and reasoned arguments and convictions. It is borne
on the wings of the unbounded enthusiasm and
overflowing emotion that a prophet can create. If a
prophet succeeds in preaching the new ideas that fill
his being, with passionate and frantic zeal, if he
succeeds in kindling the flame of emotional, nervous
enthusiasm among his hearers by his fervent
preaching, if he succeeds by means of his whirlwind
campaign to light the spark that can set the whole
country on fire, his religion becomes a living faith.
Zarathushtra's teachings had not so effectively stirred
them. Consequently, those that followed him
hanging with enthusiasm on the unheard of words
that he uttered, gave up going after him when they
saw the vehement opposition of the custodians of the

old faith. Those that had seriously heard him but
were yet undecided and hesitating in the choice
between the charms of the new and the dictares of
the old religion, deserted him. The ignorant and
unthinking people, who had, with child-like
curiosity, turned wherever his footsteps trod, imitated
the elders of society and left him. Those who were
proud to claim him as their friend forsook him when
the hour came for them to stand by him. Those that
were his kith and kin disowned him, because he had
disavowed their ancestral faith. Thus did the
wavering, timid, half-hearted followers fail him in his
hour of need and leave him. Ahura Mazda alone did
not leave him and, [23] with him on his side,
Zarathushtra felt that he was not alone in his
loneliness. His prestige, however, is shattered and all
restraint is broken. Respect for him is gone. He is
now greeted everywhere with hostile feelings and
coarse jokes. The mob that was hilarious in his
commendation becomes furious in his condemnation.
It mocks and maligns, jeers and insults him.
God fashions religion as an ideal aiming at
cohesiveness, brotherhood, and unity among
mankind. Man makes it disturbing, disruptive, and
divisive. The great ideal recedes from the very
inception of religion, until it grows dim and distant.
It does not die, because ideals are immortal. Hope,
ingrained in human heart, holds out the eternal
assurance of its eventual realization.
Friendless and forlorn, Zarathushtra flees to Ahura
Mazda. He implores him, he cries unto him to help
him as a friend would help his friend. He has no
61. Y46.1, 2.
following, no means of sustenance, and no place of
refuge. If he wants to live so that he can yet hope to
work as the prophet of Mazda and found his

excellent religion, he should leave his homeland. He
asks Mazda to point him the land to which he should
flee.61 When all hopes seem to be blighted, he bids
farewell with heavy heart to the place of his birth. He
does not know to what land he should turn and he
turns to wherever Mazda may take him. He walks
and walking thinks, dreams, falls into a reverie, stops,
wakes up, hastens his steps. He comes across villages,
but rumours have preceded him that a man, a
pretender, a blasphemer, a disturber of peace is on
the way. No headsman of the villages comes forward
to offer him an asylum in his village, even though the
traditional usage of hospitality demands that his
doors be flung open to the weary traveller. He must
go onward, he sees, and travels to places removed
from his native town, so that the people may not
know him. There, among new surroundings and new
people, he must begin his work anew. In his own
town they knew him from childhood. They could not
realize that they had among them one who had risen
through the incomparable virtues of his head and
heart to perfection, and upon whom Ahura Mazda's
grace had descended. They could not reconcile
themselves to the idea that they should bend their
heads and bow their knees to one who grew of age
among them and whose father and father's [24] A
father lived and shared their common lives. But in the
distant parts of the country where he would go as a
stranger, he hoped his mission would bear fruit. So
he went along from one village to another and, with
feet swollen with fatigue, he covered several miles
every day. Since he left his home he had not slept in
a bed. If he reached a caravanserai at night, he slept
in a corner where horses and mules, donkeys and
camels jostled together. He rested his weary head
upon the divine bosom and found a perfect haven in

the heart of Ahura Mazda. At noon he slept on the
bare floor or on a mattress or on straw under the
shade of trees. If he found a throng of people at a
halting stage passing their time in idle talk, he
ventured to address them on the subject near to his
heart. His words fell upon deaf ears and they curtly
dismissed him from their lively company. Thus
passed days after days, and season after season.
Summer and autumn had passed and he was now in
the midst of severe winter. He had dined so far on
extremely frugal meals and spent money where he
could not do without spending it, yet his pocket was
getting thinner day by day. He would have to work
to earn his honest living or beg, which he would not
do. He clothed himself in coarse cloth which
exposed him to the bleak blasts of snow and frost
that cut his face and pierced his body limb from limb.
When the great nobles of his native town and the
rich members of the Kavi fraternity fared
sumptuously on savoury dishes and luscious wines,
and slept on warm beds with velvety cushions to rest
their heads and with printed chintz curtains, the one
greater than they went hungry and cold and had
nowhere to lay his weary limbs.
Zarathushtra's teachings win the ear of the royal
court. Thus passed a long period of trials and
hardships. Zarathushtra traversed the length and
breadth of Iran. He spoke, he discoursed, he
conversed, he preached wherever he happened to be.
His prophetic career was now bearing some good
result. He was winning converts for his new religion.
He triumphed in gaining over the sympathy even of
some intelligent youths of his own family.62 His
cousin Maidyoimaongha sympathized with his cause
and soon became his ardent disciple.63 Two very

62. Y51.19.
64. Y46.16, 17; 49.9;
51.18; 53.2.
65. Y28.8.
66. Y49.8.
67. Y51.17.

brilliant brothers of the powerful Hvogva clan came 68. Y53.2, 3.
over to his [25] faith. They were Frashaoshtra and
Jamaspa.64 Zarathushtra beseeches Ahura Mazda to 69. Y46.12.
grant the gift of Good Thought to Frashaoshtra and
his other followers.65 He implores him further bestow
the most gladsome chieftainship in righteousness
upon Frashaoshtra,66 whose daughter he later takes to
wife.67 Jamaspa, called the wise, owing to his great
talents. occupied the most influential position at the
royal court. Zarathushtra gave him his daughter
Pouruchisti in marriage.68 The prophet of Iran had
made his spiritual conquest even among the
Turanians. the traditional foes of Iran, and brought
over the influential chieftain Fryana and his family to
his faith.69
Zarathushtra had begun his prophetic propaganda in
the west of Iran. He had now crossed the entire
breadth of the country and was now in the extreme
east. Bactria was the seat of the Kavi kings. For a long
time he had been preaching in the great city, which
was the meeting place of travellers and merchants
70. Y46.14.
from distant lands. He stirred up religious enthusiasm
among his hearers. He spoke with flaming
71. Y28.7.
enthusiasm and animation and his discourses warmed
their imaginations and enthused their hearts. They
72. Y51.16.
thought that the new teacher taught as man had
never taught. They bowed their knees to him.
73. Y53.2.
strewed his path with flowers and worshipped the
very ground he walked on. Success now attended
74. Y46.12.
upon him and day after day he found himself
surrounded by new converts. His victory was
complete when ultimately he triumphed in winning
as a convert Kavi Vishtaspa, the ruler of the land,
together with his royal consort Hutaosa. This was the
crowning event in the establishment of

Zoroastrianism. Conversions to the new religion
followed rapidly as a natural sequel, when it became
known that the ruling house of Iran had embraced
Zarathushtra's faith. Zarathushtra now declares with
supreme satisfaction to his divine teacher Ahura
Mazda that the king had befriended his religion and
was eager to cooperate with him in his great mission
of proclaiming his faith to all.70 He now beseeches
Ahura Mazda to give him and the royal patron of his
religion the blessings and gifts of good [26] thought,
righteousness, and devotion of Vohu Manah, Asha,
and Armaiti, so that they may make his profitable
words heard everywhere.71 The king, says
Zarathushtra, has attained the knowledge of the
sacred lore which Ahura Mazda had conceived with
Asha.72 Vishtaspa, Frashaoshtra, and others who have
now turned Zoroastrian, invoke and adore Ahura
Mazda and tread the straight paths of the Saviour
ordained by him.73 The Turanian chieftain Fryana
came over to the new faith and Zarathushtra
immortalizes his clan in his holy hymns.74
Zarathushtra's Mission. Prophets are revolutionists
and Zarathushtra was the earliest one. He saw that
the world was imperfect and its infirmities and
inequities were formidable. He was the messenger of
Ahura Mazda, the refuge of the weak, the solace of
the suffering, the hope of humanity, and the
regenerator of the world. He brought to the unhappy
world the happy tidings of the coming of the
Kingdom of Righteousness. He introduced into the
world a new spiritual order. He brought a new hope,
a new life. Brimful of life and hope, he brought cheer
and hope to mankind.

[27]
Notes:
CHAPTER IV
TOWARDS MONOTHEISM
Gods in evolution. Religion has formed a deeply
integral part of mankind at all times. We glean from
the records of early peoples the earliest gropings of
the human mind in its endeavour to understand and
interpret natural phenomena. At various stages of its
evolution, religion rises from animism to a belief in
cosmic and abstract gods. Each tribe had its local god
or gods who gained or lost in power as the seats of
their location rose or fell in political power. The fate
of the gods fluctuated with the vicissitudes of their
followers. The god who rose to power either
absorbed other gods in his person or subordinated
them as lesser gods or ministering angels in his own
service. Some of these gods were embraced in the
family of the great god as his son or consort, in case
of a goddess, and formed a divine triad of father,
mother, and son. When religious ideas approached
abstract thinking, they were represented as the
manifestations of the newly enthroned god or they
were reduced to abstractions as the great god's
attributes. When Babylon rose to power, its god
Marduk absorbed all other gods, both of the north
and the south, even his father Ea, and became the
chief god of the whole of Babylonia. The legends of
the earlier gods clung to his name and hymns
formerly composed in their honour were now
dedicated to him. Ashur, the local god of Assyria,
eclipsed gods of other localities and rose to
preeminence as his native city came to parmnount

power. When Shamash outshone his many
confederate solar gods, he became the supreme god,
and the other gods who were formerly on a footing
of equality with him were accommodated as his
satellites. Sometimes when the fighting tribes were
united by peace the rival gods of each tribe formed
their divine union. For example, the sun god Ra who
came to Egypt from Asia formed an alliance with the
popular god Amen and the dual divinities, thereafter,
came to be known as Amen Ra.
[28] The priests associated the highest attributes with
the gods whom they exalted. The poet who sang the
glory of his favourite god was always so deeply
moved by his devotion to him that he spoke and sang
of him as the most powerful and the most beautiful
god. Consequently, a monotheistic vein began to
appear in the utterances of sectarians, each of whom
acclaimed his respective god as the one and the only
god, without his like. This indiscriminate exaltation
of several gods as the all-highest and all-wisest
evoked protest from some quarters. Human
experience had taught them that a country had only
one sovereign autocrat as its ruler and two or more
kings of absolutely equal grade in power were
unthinkable. With such ideas we notice Amenhetep
IV, an adventurous king, attempting to introduce a
great religious reform among his people in the
fourteenth century B.C. He scoffed at the Egyptian
pantheon and declared that there was only one god
whose outward form was the sun. This god was Aten,
the visible disk of the sun. In his zeal for reform, he
changed his own name to Akhenaten or 'pleasing to
the Sun-disk.' He suppressed the worship of other
gods, destroyed their statues, demolished the temples
that housed them, sequestered their property and

obliterated their names wherever they appeared. He
consecrated temples to Aten and made the cult of the
Sun-disk his state religion and commanded his
subjects to offer their devotions to this one God
only. Being himself a poetic genius, he composed fine
hymns to the new God and addressed him as the
inscrutable creator, one God, absolute in power. The
revolutionary reform, however, did not survive the
death of the poet-king. The old gods returned from
exile and were soon reinstated.
The gods were in most cases subject to human
infirmities. Ra grew old with age and became weak.
Gods had their wives, who like women in human
society were subordinated to their lords. But as
history records instances of some women of
exceptional talents and virtue who broke the social
barriers raised by men against their sex and rose to
pre-eminence, so some goddesses of abnormal energy
rose to power. The great goddess Ishtar, for instance,
absorbed all other goddesses of the BabylonianAssyrian pantheon and became the supreme female
divinity. It was at her temple that sacred prostitution
became a feature. Osiris had Horus for his son by his
wife Isis. His brother Set overpowered and killed him
by cunning and intrigue. [29] Some gods were
ceremoniously bathed and clothed, adorned and
perfumed with incense by priests every morning. The
divine toilet over, they were treated with sumptuous
food and drink of slaughtered animals and wine. The
gods of the Greeks lived on the summit of Mount
Olympus. They were, like the members of their
divine fraternity elsewhere, invested with magnified
human forms and traits. They loved and hated,
intrigued and deceived and shared human frailties. It
was for the demoralizing influence of such beliefs

that Plato later forbade the tales of the frail gods in
his ideal Republic, and Xenophanes poured out scorn
over the anthropomorphic gods of Homer and
Hesiod.
The gods were generally the personifications of
nature. The solar gods, from their high position in
the heavens, naturally became the overseers of men's
actions upon earth and consequently they came to be
regarded as the celestial judges. The solar gods Anu,
Ninib, Nergal, and Shamash, at various periods of
their ascendency to power, became the judges who
punished wrong-doers. With the advancement of
thought, the moral tone improved. The heart is the
voice of God and welfare in life is gained by
following its guidance, says Amenhetep. The
emphasis that he lays on the adherence to truth in his
inscriptions anticipates Darius the Great by several
centuries. But the one god who rose to the greatest
moral grandeur before the incomparably more
sublime god that Zarathushtra discovered, was
Varuna. A god of the sky in his origin, he rose to
great ethical heights and became the upholder and
guardian of the moral order upon earth. He is called
omniscient and infallible. He detected man's truth
and falsehood. If two men sat together and schemed
some wrong, Varuna was there as the third. The
winkings of man's eyes were numbered by him. The
sinner laid bare his heart before him, confessed his
sins, and prayed for his forgiveness, pathetically
saying that he didnot commit sin willingly but that
he was led astray by wrath, dice, and liquor. The
hymns composed in his honour are most ethical.
[30]
CHAPTER V

AHURA MAZDA
Ahura Mazda is the name Zarathushtra gives to
God. The Iranians, as we shall see later, had brought
to their new homeland several gods of the IndoIranian pantheon. Zarathushtra does not mention
them by name in his hymns. This omission is not
accidental; it is deliberate. His is altogether a new
religion. No wonder he tells his hearers that he
speaks to them words that are unheard of before.1 All
thinking and doing, whether human or divine, is
done through the mind. It is knowledge or wisdom
which creates, moulds, and guides anything and
everything. He, therefore, clothes the idea of
godhead with wisdom and names him 'Ahura Mazda.'
This collocation means literally, 'The Lord Wisdom'
or 'The Wise Lord.' The first element of this
compound, Ahura, 'Lord,' is one of the Indo-Iranian
1. Y31.1.
generic forms of godhead and Zarathushtra confers
upon it the Iranian epithet Mazda, 'Wise.' The Aryan
and Semitic gods that preceded Ahura Mazda were
nature gods. Some of them later rose to a higher
spiritual level and acquired spiritual epithets. Ahura
Mazda was never a nature-god. He was what he ever
is, the highly spiritual being. Apart from its use in the
Gathas, the term Mazda is found in its derivative
form Mazdaka, used as a Median proper name in 715
B.C. in the Assyrian inscriptions of Sargon.
Moreover, the compound Ahura Mazda itself is found
in its Assyrian equivalent Assara Mazas in an
inscription of Assurbanipal. Though the inscription
bears the date of the reign of king Assurbanipal, it
records the use of this Assyrian form of Ahura Maida
in the latter part of the second millennium.
Zarathushtra uses the divine name variously as the

metrical composition of the hymns requires. He
employs the combinations Ahura Mazda and Mazda
Ahura or the forms Ahura or Mazda respectively,
designating God in all cases. In many instances the
[31] terms Ahura and Mazda are used separately in a
single strophe, the one at the opening and the other
at the close with different exhortations and prayers to
each, yet in both cases as applied to the Supreme
Being. Ahura Mazda.
Ahura Mazda is the Being par excellence. Ahura
Mazda sits at the apex among the celestial beings of
2. Y28.8.
Garonmana [Garothman, i.e. Heaven]. He is not
begotten, nor is there one like unto him. Beyond him,
3. Y28.5; 33.11.
apart from him, and without him nothing exists. He
is the supreme being through whom everything
4. Y28.7; 43.1.
exists. He is brighter than the brightest of creation,
higher than the highest heavens, older than the
5. Y48.3.
oldest in the universe. He is the best one.2 He knows
no elder, he has no equal. There is none to dispute
6. Y45.10.
his supremacy and contest his place. Nor is there one
to struggle successfully with him for the mastery of
7. Y31.7.
the heavens. He is the first and foremost. He is the
most perfect being. He is almighty.3 He is the
8. Y43.4.
absolute sovereign.4 He is beneficent.5 He is
changeless.6 He is the same now and for ever.7 He
9. Y44.15.
was, he is, and he will be the same transcendent
being, moving all, yet moved by none. In the midst
10. Y46.9.
of the manifold changes wrought by him in the
universe, the Lord God remains changeless and
11. Y29.10.
unaffected, for he is mighty.8 He will decide victory
between the rival hosts of good and evil.9 He is the
12. Y28.3.
most worthy of invocation,10 and the first possessor
of felicity and joy.11 There is none before him.12 He is
13. Y45.6.
the greatest of all.13 He is the only God proper, than
whom there is none higher. Everything comes from

him and through him. He is the lord of all. Many are
his attributes. They are not accidents of his being. as
will be shown below, but are his very essence.
The nature of Ahura Mazda. Ahura Mazda is spirit
in his being. The cardinal attribute Spirit or
Beneficent Spirit or Most Beneficent Spirit is his very
essence. Zarathushtra acquaints mankind for the first
time in the history of religions with the concept of
the godhead that is most incomparable in sublimity
and unprecedented in the grandeur of nobility. He is
higher than the highest being worshipped by
mankind before his day. He [32] is devoid of all
14. Y31.8; 45.8.
anthropomorphic traits which characterized the
Aryan and Semitic gods. Man, however, can
15. Y28.11.
comprehend abstract ideas and spiritual conceptions
when they are put before him in words and
16. Y31.3.
expressions clothed in the garb of earthly imagery
and compassed in human language. Zarathushtra,
17. Y43.4.
therefore, speaks of Ahura Mazda in human analogy.
He conceives of Ahura Mazda in thought and
18. Y31.13.
apprehends him with his eye.14 He asks him to teach
by the word of his mouth15 and to tell him with the
19. Y28.5; 46.16.
very tongue of his mouth.16 He is also spoken of as
distributing good and evil to men by his own hands,17
20. Y33.5; 43.3.
and as observing with his eyes all things hidden and
open.18 He lives in the empyrean enthroned in his
21. Y30.5.
majesty.19 He is ever present in the straight paths that
lead mankind to righteousness.20 In his resplendence
he lives in the heavenly realms and wears the
firmament as his garment.21 Yahweh, likewise, covers
himself with light as with a garment. Expressions like
these are symbolical and they are not to be taken
literally, since Ahura Mazda, as the whole tone of the
Gathas proves, is to be seen or conceived only
through the mind's eye. The finite can describe the

infinite through finite analogies and similes alone.
The transcendental immanence of Ahura Mazda.
Ahura Mazda has his celestial mansions in the highest
heavens, upon the vast expanse of the earth and in
the hearts of the righteous persons. He is
transcendent in as much as he is infinitely more
sublime and greater than his creatures. Yet he is not
so remote and ineffable as not to be approached and
addressed and greeted by his ardent worshippers. He
22. Y45.11.
is immanent in the sense that man can enter into
close and loving relations with him, and own him as
23. Y44.17.
his father and brother and friend.22 He befriends
those who seek his friendship and loves those who
24. Y44.1.
long for his love.23 Zarathushtra addresses Ahura
24
Mazda as his friend. He is life's safest anchorage
25. Y46.2, 7.
and Zarathushtra, in his misfortunes, pours out his
heart in his divine friend's bosom and cries unto him
26. Y34.7.
for help and protection as a friend helps a friend.25
He [33] lovingly helps those who flee unto him in
their distress and betake themselves to his protection. 27. Y34.1.
There is none other than he who shields men against
harm and they invoke his protection through Asha.26 28. Y31.21, 22.
We sleep secure because he guards us lovingly and
we live in safety because he stands by our side when 29. Y33.10.
we awake out of sleep. His goodness towards us
knows no bounds. Immortality, holiness, power, and 30. Y31.16.
perfection are his gifts to those who deserve them
through their deeds and words and prayers.27 Man
can become his friend and companion through his
words and deeds of righteousness.28 He is invoked to
bestow upon the pious the good things of life for his
love of them.29 With his good understanding, man
can imitate him and be like unto him by promoting
the welfare of all around him through righteousness.30

The prophet prays for his vision and communion
with him.31 He strives to approach him through
Good Mind,32 and through his devoted
supplications.33 With outstretched hands he aspires
to reach him with songs of praise on his lips.34 Thus
will he continue his praise, he says, as long as he has
strength and vigour,35 and adds that the stars and the
sun and the dawn all unite in singing praise unto
him.36 Consumed with the fervour of religious
emotion, he implores Ahura Mazda to rise up for
him,37 and to come to him and manifest himself to
him in his own person.38 Sraosha comes with Vohu
Manah unto him whom Ahura Mazda desires.39

31. Y33.6.
32. Y28.2.
33. Y50.9.
34. Y50.8.
35. Y50.11.
36. Y50.10.
37. Y33.12.
38. Y33.7; 49.1.
39. Y44.16.

Ahura Mazda is the creator. Creation is a free act of
the divine goodness of Ahura Mazda.40 In the
beginning when he lived in his supreme selfsufficiency, he conceived the thought to clothe the
heavenly realm with light.41 He created 1ight, and
darkness was there, for darkness shadows light.42 He
is the father and creator of Vohu Manah,43 of Asha,44
of Khshathra,45 of Armaiti,46 of Haurvatat and
Ameretat,47 and of Geush [34] Tashan.48 The joygiving cattle and this universe are his creations.49 He
upholds the earth and firmament from falling.50 He
made the moon wax and wane, and determined the
path of the sun and stars.51 He yoked swiftness to
wind and clouds.52 He clothed the heavenly realms
with light.53 He it was who made morning and noon
and night.54 He created kine, waters and plants.55 He
created human beings and their spirits, breathed life
in their bodies and endowed them with the freedom

40. Y44.7.
41. Y31.7.
42. Y44.5.
43. Y31.8; 44.4; 45.4.
44. Y31.7, 8; 44.3;
47.2.
45. Y44.7.
46. Y31.9; 44.7; 45.4.
47. Y51.7.
48. Y31.9; 47.3.

of wi11.56 He inspired love between the son and
father.57 He made sleep and wakefulness.58 He is the 49. Y44.6; 50.11.
beneficent dispenser of blessings to mankind.59 Weal
and woe are ordained by him.60
50. Y44.4.
51. Y44.3.
52. Y44.4.
53. Y31.7.
54. Y44.5.
55. Y44.4; 48.6; 51.7.
56. Y31.11; 46.6.
57. Y44.7.
58. Y44.5.
59. Y28.5; 33.11; 48.3.
60. Y45.9.
Ahura Mazda is the lord of wisdom. The very name
of the godhead embodies in itself great wisdom.
Ahura Mazda is the wise lord.61 He has created the
universe through his wisdom and rules it through
wisdom. He is the most knowing one.62 He is the farseeing one,63 and so is he the all-seeing one.64 He
knows all that is done in the past and all that will be
done in the future, and judges through his
omniscience.65 Zarathushtra seeks knowledge from
him of what will be and what will not be.66 Through
his Best Mind he knows man's desert at the

61. Y29.6; 45.3; 48.2,
3.
62. Y46.19.
63. Y33.13.
64. Y45.4.
65. Y29.4.

reckoning.67 Human beings have their masks drawn
on their faces and none can see what is hidden
within. But Ahura Mazda has an eye over them all
and with penetrating eyes he sees their open and
secret faults.68 None can deceive his wisdom,69 for he
is undeceivable.70 He is the consummate teacher of
those who believingly hear him and become of one
mind with him and who, inspired by Asha and Vohu
Manah, exalt him by their words and deeds.71

66. Y31.5.
67. Y32.6, 7.
68. Y31.13.
69. Y43.6.
70. Y45.4.
71. Y51.3.

Ahura Mazda is the law-giver and judge. With the
creation of man Ahura Mazda has ordained laws for
the rightful conduct of his life.72 The great mission of
the prophet is to acquaint [35] mankind with these 72. Y46.15; 51.19.
and to lead all to see for themselves with their
intelligence that their welfare depends on the faithful 73. Y30.2.
adherence to them. He exhorts his hearers to give a
74. Y46.6.
careful hearing to his words, understand with clear
discernment what he tells them, and, with the
75. Y30.11; 45.7; 51.6.
discreet exercise of the freedom of the will, with
which Ahura Mazda has endowed them, make their
76. Y31.14.
own choice of conduct.73 The divine law-giver has
established the moral order in the beginning of the
77. Y29.4; 31.8.
world.74 He has ordained the commandments of
reward and retribution to the righteous and the
wicked, and Zarathushtra asks his followers to keep 78. Y43.4, 5.
them in mind and live lawful lives so that they may
thereby win felicity for themselves.75 Every man and 79. Y30.10; 48.7;
every woman that lives this earthly life will have to 49.10.
stand at the reckoning one day to receive his or her
80. Y30.2.
own desert, and Zarathushtra teaches them all the
laws of the requitals of human conduct in which
Ahura Mazda himself has instructed him.76 Ahura
Mazda is the lord who knows and watches and judges

the deeds of mortals.77 He holds the destinies of
mankind in his hands and apportions reward and
retribution unto the righteous and the wicked.78 The
righteous souls will live in the abode of Ahura
Mazda.79 He punishes the wrong-doers just as he
rewards the righteous, but he shows compassion also
and forgives when the penitent sinner casts himself
on his mercy.80
[36]
CHAPTER VI
SPENTA MAINYU
Spenta Mainyu is the self-revealing activity of
Ahura Mazda. The supreme godhead, we have seen,
is immutable, perfect, spiritual unity. Zarathushtra
solves the problem of reconciling the unchangeable
nature of Ahura Mazda with the world of change by
postulating a principle that intervenes between the
unmoved mover and the moved. This working
medium of Ahura Mazda spans the chasm between
the supersensuous and the sensuous. He brings the
transcendence and immanence of Ahura Mazda into a
synthesis. Ahura Mazda is neither completely
separated nor completely merged in the world. He is
the primordial, self-existing being. In his infinite
goodness he wills the creation of the universe. Both
heavenly and earthly existence lived with him and in
him as idealized contents of his being. The
projection or manifestation of his creative will and
thought is his active working principle Spenta
Mainyu, Holy Spirit. Spenta Mainyu is as old as
Ahura Mazda, for be ever was in Ahura Mazda and
with Ahura Mazda. Though he is thus part of Ahura
Mazda, in his manifestation as the working self of

Ahura Mazda he is different from Ahura Mazda. He
is not an entity or personality. Ahura Mazda is the
greatest spiritual personality. Spenta Mainyu is his
image, his replica. He represents the creative
attribute of Ahura Mazda in his relation to the
created world.
Spenta Mainyu symbolizes the ideal or perfect
existence as conceived in thought by Ahura Mazda.
The materialization of the divine thought in creation
spells imperfection and Spenta Mainyu is shadowed
by his inseparable opposite. These two primeval
spirits, who are spoken of as twins, emerged from the
divine bosom and by their innate choice appeared as
the better and the bad in thought, word, and deed.1
He, the Most Holy Spirit, chose righteousness and
he who is called the Evil Spirit [37] wooed the worst
as his sphere of action.2 The better one of the two
spirits told the evil one that they were by nature
opposed to each other in their thoughts and
teachings, understandings and beliefs, words, and
deeds, selves and souls -- in nothing could they twain
ever meet.3 When the two first came together in the
world, they created life and non-life and established
the law of reward and retribution for mankind, that
the righteous will reap at the end of existence the
weal of Best Thought and the wicked the woe of the
Worst Existence.4
The Gathas variously speak of Spenta Mainyu either
as the attribute of Ahura Mazda or as his vicegerent,
or as his co-worker, or as identified with him or as
distinct from him. It is Spenta Mainyu that Ahura
Mazda creates cattle and water and plants and all that
exist.5 Ahura Mazda is asked to give ear to man's
invocation through Spenta Mainyu,6 and to strength

1. Y30.3.
2. Y30.5.
3. Y45.2.
4. Y30.4.

5. Y44.7; 47.3; 51.7.
6. Y45.6.
7. Y33.12.
8. Y47.1.

through him.7 Through him does Ahura Mazda give
Perfection and Immortality unto the pious who live a
righteous and devoted life of best thoughts, words,
and deeds.8 Ahura Mazda is implored to teach by his
own mouth, on behalf of his Spirit, how the world
first came into being.9 It is through his Spirit that
Ahura Mazda furthers his blessed realms10 He gives
the best unto the righteous through Spenta Mainyu.11
Zarathushtra asks Ahura Mazda what award will he
make unto the believers and the non-believers
through his Spirit.12 Mazda will come at the final
dispensation with Spenta Mainyu.13 Through him
does one win the felicity of paradise.14 The devout
seek to be acquainted with the works of Spenta
Mainyu.15 The Spirit knows the attitude of the false
speaker and the true speaker, the wise and the unwise
as they are led by the promptings of their hearts and
minds.16 Spenta Mainyu is the friend of all and he
protects them through Righteousness in both the
worlds from transgression.17 It is the wicked that are
hurt by him.18 Spenta Mainyu or the Holy Spirit is
sometimes spoken [38] of as the Good Spirit,19 or the
Best Spirit,20 or the Most Holy Spirit.21 This
superlative title, the Most Holy Spirit, is sometimes
applied to Ahura Mazda himself.22 It is also used for
Spenta Mainyu as apart from Ahura Mazda. For
example, Zarathushtra tells Ahura Mazda that he
chooses his Most Holy Spirit for himself.23 The Most
Holy Spirit, the one who stands in opposition to his
evil twin brother, dons the massive heavens for his
garment.24

9. Y28.11.
10. Y31.7.
11. Y47.5.
12. Y31.3; 47.6.
13. Y43.6.
14. Y43.2.
15. Y28.1.
16. Y31.12.
17. Y44.2.
18. Y47.4.
19. Y45.5.
20. Y33.6.
21. Y47.2.
22. Y33.12; 43.2; 45.5;
51.7.
23. Y43.16.
24. Y30.5; for Spenta
Mainyu see Jackson,
Zoroastrian Studies, p.
29, 30, 32, 33, 40, 69,

71; Gray, The
Foundations of the Iranian
Religions, p. 101-106;
Kanga, A New
Interpretation of the Spenta
Mainyu of the Gathas,
Bombay, 1933.
[39]
CHAPTER VII
MAZDA'S MINISTERING ANGELS
Amesha Spentas in the making. Zarathushtra holds
before mankind six cardinal virtues of Ahura Mazda
for emulation. Primarily, they are pure abstractions,
etherealized moral concepts, symbolic ideals, abstract
figures. They have no individuality, no
characteristics, no mythology as the Indo-Iranian
divinities have. Zarathushtra aims at replacing the
divine beings that owe their origin to some natural
phenomena and later rise to moral stature, by
1. Y30.9; 31.4.
spiritual ideals. The heavenly beings that he finds
honoured among his people are such ancient beings
2. See Tiele, The
that have evolved from the various aspects of nature.
Religion of the Persian
Such are Mithra and his associates that hold spiritual
Peoples, tr. Nariman, p.
sway over the hearts of the Iranian peoples. The
116.
prophet substitutes for these august concrete beings
his worshipful attributes of Ahura Mazda. In the
heavenly hierarchy they represent altogether a novel
feature. They are entirely unlike the gods whom
mankind had been accustomed to worship under
various names before his advent. He names these
divine qualifications Vohu Manah, 'Good Mind,'
Asha, 'Righteousness,' Khshathra, 'Divine Kingdom,'
Armaiti, 'Devotion,' Haurvatat, 'Perfection,' and

Ameretat, 'Immortality.' They form Ahura Mazda's
being. That is, Vohu Manah is Ahura Mazda's Good
Mind or Good Thought, Asha is his Righteousness
and so are others his different virtues. This idealistic
phase that Zarathushtra puts before man does not
long retain its character. The abstract virtues soon
get detached from Ahura Mazda and assume thin
personification. In two instances we meet with the
appellative terms Mazdâo (schâ) Ahurâonghô 'Ahura
Mazda and his associates,'1 like the Vedic plural
expressions Varunas and Rudras.2 Here we witness
the Amesha Spentas or the Holy Immortals of the
post-Gathic period in the making.
[40] These six divine attributes which we have said
tend towards forming the heavenly host of Ahura
Mazda, it is suggested, have originated under the
3. Moulton, Early
influence of the Vedic Adityas.3 Unlike the seven
Zoroastrianism, p. 98 f.,
Gathic divine appellations, the Adityas, however, are
117, 240; Geiger, Die
variously spoken of as six or seven or eight or even
Amesha Spentas, p. 164twelve in number. They include great Vedic divinities
245; Gray, The
like Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Indra, and others and
Foundations of the Iranian
even sun and moon and fire. Zarathushtra has set his
Religions, p. 17.
face against them. His spiritual impersonations of the
godhead are, it seems to us, a class by themselves and
are particular to him.
Vohu Manah, Asha, and Khshathra are neuter nouns
taken in the later Avestan as male members of the
divine hierarchy and Armaiti, Haurvatat, and
Ameretat are feminine names. They occur in the
4. Y34.11; 45.10; 47.1.
different Gathic stanzas individually or two or three
or four or more together indefinitely. The hexad, or 5. Y31.22; 51.1.
taken along with Ahura Mazda, the heptad, is not
fixed in the Gathas as we find it in the later Avesta,
where it is expressly said that the Holy Immortals are

seven. Yet we have instances where Ahura Mazda
and his six epithets are mentioned together.4 Asha
stands first in the number of times he is mentioned
and Vohu Manah, though first of the heavenly host,
comes second. They are followed by Khshathra and
Armaiti respectively. Haurvatat and Ameretat, who
invariably occur together, make up the rear. With the
exception of Vohu Manah, whose name is always a
fixed compound with Vohu, 'Good,' qualifying
Manah, 'Mind,' all the others have not the
stereotyped epithets that the four of them are given
at the later period. At times Vohu Manah's epithet
designating his goodness is transferred to Khshathra.5
As the process towards the personification of Ahura
Mazda's attributes has already begun, it is often
extremely difficult to decide whether the qualitative
divine expressions stand for personified beings or as
abstract nouns designating certain virtues in
application to Ahura Mazda himself or to man.
The prominent feature of these six abstract attributes
when they have fully grown into Ahura Mazda's
ministering angels is the twofold character of work
they are assigned to perform. [41] In addition to a
specific virtue that each represents on the spiritual
side, a material object is put under his or her direct
guardianship on the physical side. This physical
aspect of their functions is most marked in the later
period. Its origin, however, can be traced in the
Gathas where we find a beginning already made of
associating some one material creation with every
one of them. We shall now deal with them
individually.
VOHU MANAH
The first in Ahura Mazda's creation. When Ahura

6. Y44.4.

Mazda was with none beside him, in his supreme
isolation, he evolved in his mind the thought of
7. Y31.8; 45.4.
creating the universe. He named his first creation
after his mind and called him Vohu Manah, Good
8. Y28.9; 31.4, 7; 32.6,
6
Mind. Zarathushtra fondly speaks of him as Ahura 11; 33.9; 41.1; 50.1, 4;
Mazda's son.7 He is often addressed in the Gathas in 51.4.
the superlative as Vahishta Manah, Best Mind.8
Occasionally, Vohu Manah is converted into Vohu 9. Y45.5; 48.8.
Mainyu, Good Spirit9 or Vahishta Mainyu, Best
Spirit.10 It has to be noted that Vohu Mainyu or
10. Y33.6.
Vahishta Mainyu has nothing in common with
Spenta Mainyu or the Holy Spirit, the first of the two
Primeval Spirits of Ahura Mazda.
Vohu Manah is Ahura Mazda's Good Thought. The
ethical system of Zarathushtra has the triad of good
thoughts, good words and good deeds as its basis.
Good words and good deeds proceed from good
thoughts and good thoughts are inspired in man by
Vohu Manah. In all his waking hours man thinks and
thinks incessantly. He thinks useful thoughts and
wise thoughts and great thoughts and wholesome
thoughts and kindly thoughts and virtuous thoughts
and good thoughts. But he thinks also idle thoughts
and foolish thoughts and mean thoughts and
malicious thoughts and cruel thoughts and vicious
thoughts and evil thoughts. The mind soars high and
wings its way in the realm of righteousness or it sinks
low and grovels in the mire of wickedness. Man
thinks thoughts, but thoughts make man. Thoughts
make him a human being, a saint, and an angel; and
thoughts [42] make him an animal, a sinner, and a
demon. Man is thought materialized in word and
deed. Vohu Manah is the ideal that man as a thinking
being has to realize.

Vohu Manah symbolizes Ahura Mazda's wisdom.
Man thinks but he reasons besides, and his reasoning
raises him above the level of the animal world. The
Gathas employ khratu and chisti to designate wisdom. 11. Y48.3.
They do not, however, classify wisdom as the later
12. Y28.1.
Avesta distinguishes the innate wisdom from the
acquired wisdom. The loftiest ideal for man upon
earth is to be like unto Ahura Mazda and it is through 13. Y48.9.
the wisdom of Vohu Manah that man can realize it.11
Zarathushtra invokes Ahura Mazda to grant him the 14. Y48.11.
wisdom of Vohu Manah,12 and longs to be
15. Y34.10.
acquainted with the decrees of Vohu Manah.13 He
desires to know to whom among his followers will
the wisdom of Vohu Manah descend.14 The wise man 16. Y34.7.
of good understanding performs deeds that are
pleasing to Vohu Manah.15 The enlightenment that 17. Y30.9.
Vohu Manah gives enables the devout to practise the
doctrines of weal and woe.16 They pray for thoughts 18. Y28.10.
to turn where wisdom abides.17 Mazda is implored to
fulfil the desires of the wise who are devoted to Vohu
Manah18
Vohu Manah's grace. Zarathushtra adores Vohu
Manah with songs of praise,19 and teaches his
followers to offer him praise.20 He asks Ahura Mazda
to teach him how best he could inspire men to the
deeds of Vohu Manah.21 He tells his heavenly father
that he will always work for the furtherance of the
domain of Vohu Manah,22 and adds that as long as he
has strength left in him he will, in union with Vohu
Manah, lead mankind on the path of righteousness.23
He implores Ahura Mazda to come down to him
through Vohu Manah.24 Through Vohu Manah does
the prophet long to reach Ahura Mazda,25 and
through the performance of the deeds pleasing unto
Vohu Manah does he long to glorify and reach his

19. Y28.3.
20. Y30.1.
21. Y48.8.
22. Y28.11.
23. Y28.4.
24. Y28.6.
25. Y28.2.

maker.26 Pouruchisti is advised to seek Vohu Manah's
fellowship.27 The devout seek to propitiate Vohu
Manah to win his kinship.28 Ahura Mazda is besought
by them to be the revealer of Vohu Manah [43] unto
them.29 When enlightenment descends upon
Zarathushtra, he longs to see Vohu Manah,30 and
prays that he may come to help him.31 His yearning
to have a glimpse of the divine mind is satisfied.
Vohu Manah comes to him and illumines his mind.32
The prophet seeks to know from him the rules of life
that lead to happiness.33 Vohu Manah teaches him
the working of Ahura Mazda.34 He asks Mazda to
teach him through Vohu Manah his secret
doctrines.35

26. Y50.9, 10.
27. Y53.3.
28. Y45.9.
29. Y31.17.
30. Y28.5.
31. Y28.3.
32. Y43.7, 9, 11, 13,
15.
33. Y44.8.
34. Y45.6.
35. Y50.6.

Life led according to the promptings of Vohu Manah 36. Y43.1.
is life lived well and Zarathushtra prays for the life, of 37. Y28.7; Y43.16.
38. Y33.6.
Good Mind.36 The blessings of Vohu Manah form
the precious reward for man and are gained through 39. Y34.12.
the performance of good deeds inspired by
40. Y34.13.
37
righteousness. Zarathushtra longs to know through 41. Y32.11.
Vohu Manah the straight paths of life.38 There are
42. Y32.9.
the paths of Vohu Manah and Mazda is invoked to 43. Y49.2.
reveal them,39 Ahura Mazda grants the prayer and
44. Y44.13.
speaks about the paths of Vohu Manah to
45. Y32.4.
40
Zarathushtra. Wicked persons mislead men who
46. Y34.8.
strive to live an upright life and follow the paths of 47. Y34.9.
Vohu Manah.41 The prophet warns his followers
48. Y28.9.
against the evil teachers who keep them back from 49. Y46.2.
appreciating the worth of acquisition of Vohu
50. Y43.2.

Manah.42 The evil-minded Bendva defies the counsel 51. Y32.9.
of Vohu Manah.43 The faithful are eager to learn how 52. Y28.8.
they could keep far from those that do not seek Vohu 53. Y33.13.
Manah's counsel.44 The evil doers are separated from 54. Y28.10.
Vohu Manah.45 Vohu Manah leaves those who do
55. Y33.3.
46
not practise righteousness, and righteousness flees 56. Y49.5.
from those who follow not Vohu Manah, in the same 57. Y49.3.
manner as noxious creatures fly from men,47 The
58. Y33.5, 12; Y44.6;
pious therefore declare that they will not annoy
Y51.21.
48
Vohu Manah. Vohu Manah is dispenser of the
59. Y29.10.
riches of the well disciplined mind and Zarathushtra 60. Y31.4.
longs to win it through righteousness.49 The pious
61. Y46.10.
invoke Mazda to reward their efforts to lead
62. Y51.7.
righteous lives by bestowing upon them the riches of 63. Y45.10.
Vohu Manah.50 It is the [44] teachers of evil that
64. Y29.10.
51
prevent men from valuing these riches. The prophet 65. Y45.5.
prays for the gifts of Vohu Manah for himself and his 66. Y31.21.
associates.52 Vohu Manah's reward is an
67. Y34.5.
incomparable blessing.53 Ahura Mazda is asked to
68. Y32.6.
grant the wishes of those who are worthy of Vohu
69. Y31.5.
Manah's reward owing to their righteousness.54
70. Y34.11.
Those that are good unto men who endeavour to lead 71. Y43.6.
righteous lives will share the blessings of Vohu
72. Y34.14.
Manah.55 They are religious in truth who embrace
73. Y50.11.
the good thoughts of Vohu Manah and base their
74. Y46.18.
actions of life upon them; such persons win
75. Y47.2.
56
prosperity and happiness. The prophet prays for
76. Y31.6.
57
chieftainship through Vohu Manah. Man obtains
77. Y46.13.
power through goodness of his mind and he invokes 78. Y46.12.
Ahura Mazda to grant him that power through Vohu 79. Y44.6.
Manah.58 Zarathushtra asks Vohu Manah to bestow 80. Y30.8.
power upon his disciples.59 Girt with such power,
81. Y46.3.
man can wage a successful war against wickedness,
therefore do the votaries beseech Vohu Manah to
endow them with it.60 Mazda gives power unto the
righteous as reward through Vohu Manah.61 He is

invoked to give endurance and durability through
Vohu Manah.62 These he gives and in addition he
bequeaths upon the good, perfection and
immortality.63 Those who in obedience to the
teachings of the prophet do the deeds of Vohu
Manah are given good abodes and joy in life,64 and
perfection and immortality.65 Whoso befriends
Mazda through thoughts and deeds will be given
steadfastness of Vohu Manah.66 Vohu Manah
protects the poor.67 Through him does Ahura Mazda
know the deserts of mankind.68 Zarathushtra asks
Mazda to let him know the award he will give him
through Vohu Manah.69 Those in whose life
righteousness and devotion are blended, further the
dominion of Vohu Manah.70 The righteous bring
prosperity to the World through the deeds of Vohu
Manah71 Mazda awards his bounty to those who
through deeds of Vohu Manah work for the world.72
He promotes the [45] best wishes of the truthful
workers through Vohu Manah.73 The prophet
promises to give through Vohu Manah the best that
is in his power to those who rejoice him by their
goodness.74 One acquires the best of the Holy Spirit
through the words of Vohu Manah and the devotion
of Armaiti.75 Vohu Manah furthers the Kingdom of
Ahura Mazda.76 He prospers the possessions of those
that rejoice Zarathushtra.77 He welcomes the
Turanian Fryans to the joy of Mazda.78 Vohu Manah
will announce the advent of the Kingdom of Ahura
Mazda.79 He will establish it at the end of time for
those who have helped righteousness to rout
wickedness.80 He will come to the help of the
Saoshyants at the Renovation.81
Vohu Manah's relation to paradise. This becomes
most marked in the later period. The beginning

82. Y30.4.

83. Y30.10; Y44.9.
towards this phase is already to be noted in the
Gathas. Vahishta Manah or Best Thought is spoken
of as the paradise itself where the righteous will go 84. Y53.4.
after death.82 Vohu Manah dwells in the heavenly
home along with Mazda and Asha.83 Paradise is said 85. Y28.4.
to be the heritage of Vohu Manah.84 Zarathushtra
knows the rewards of deeds done for Ahura Mazda 86. Y32.15.
and desires to lead his soul to paradise through Vohu
Manah.85 Those who oppose the evil deeds of the
87. Y43.4.
wicked who are wilfully blind and deaf to the
teachings of the prophet, will go to the heavenly
88. Y46.14.
86
abode of Vohu Manah. The mighty power of Vohu
Manah will be manifested when Mazda will deal out 89. Y33.5.
justice to the righteous, and the wicked through his
fire87 Through the words of Vohu Manah the prophet
honours those who have worked for the divine
purpose and whom Mazda will therefore gather in his
abode.88 The pious pray for long life of felicity in the
paradisiac domain of Vohu Manah.89
Vohu Manah in association with cattle. Vohu
Manah's connection with animal life is hinted in the
Gathas. This trait becomes much emphasized in the
later period when he becomes the genius of cattle
and takes the animal world under his protection, [46]
as a secondary part of his function as the premier
angel of Ahura Mazda. When Geush Urvan, as the
genius of the sentient beings, living upon earth,
complains of the wrath and rapine to which the
animal kingdom is subjected, Vohu Manah consoles
her with the gladsome news that the creator of the
world was sending Zarathushtra, his messenger, to
teach mankind to protect the cattle and kine.90 In
consultation with Vohu Manah, it is said, Ahura
Mazda created cattle and pastures to feed them.91
Vohu Manah is the protector of cattle.92 They are a

90. Y29.7, 8.
91. Y47.3.
92. Y50.1.
93. Y48.6.
94. Y45.9.

precious asset of Vohu Manah and give durability
and endurance to mankind.93 It is through the good
understanding of Vohu Manah, that men are inspired
to work for cattle.94
ASHA
The Indo-Iranians recognize a universal order
prevailing in the world. Life upon the earth reveals
to man that a smooth and graceful and ordered
movement goes on all around him in nature. Spring
and summer, autumn and winter, with their ceaseless
seasonal succession of changes, take their unvarying
course. The tides rise and fan punctually. The dawn
and morn and noon and evening and night go their
uninterrupted daily round. The dying day gives birth
to the night The night hangs its myriad of silvery
lamps to lighten the darkness. The dawn breaks to
resurrect the day and the day goes the perennial
round of its birth. The heavens and their glittering
hosts, the sun and the moon and the stars and the
planets march at a regulated space. Despite the casual
freaks and caprices, the laws governing the
movements of nature seem to be immutable. This
unfailing regularity of nature led the Indo-Iranians to
discern the fact that a stable order prevailed in the
universe which ensured its existence. They callled it
rta. They emulated this universal order and
introduced it in all their human activities. They
offered prayers to gods, they sacrificed to them
seasonal offerings. All this was to be done at fixed
times, reciting specific formulas, chanted in a
prescribed manner and with regulated movements of
sacred implements. The ceremonials were thus to be
per [47] formed in accordance with the established
rules and under a fixed order. This order was rta in

rituals or rite, a word derived from the same stem.
Thus step by step they advanced higher and saw that
human life can best be lived when man's relations
with his neighbours, his duty towards his fellowmen
and towards the heavenly beings were regulated
according to fixed laws. Thus they came to
recognition of a basic moral order regulating human
affairs and understood by rta employed in ethical
matters as right or righteousness, word, of the same
significance. Varuna, Mitra, and the Adityas, as also
Agni and Soma, came to be regarded as the upholders
of the moral order.
Zarathushtra adopts Asha, the variant of rta. A
cardinal figures most prominently in the Gathas is
Asha. Its familiar and widely known Iranian variant is
arta, areta, equivalent to the Vedic rta. Words derived
from this stem must been freely used in Western Asia
and surrounding countries about four thousand years
ago. We gather from the clay bearing cuneiform
inscriptions discovered at Tell-el-Amarna in Middle
Egypt and the great find of tablets at Boghaz-Keui in
Asia Minor that Dushratta, a Mitanni king, was ruling
in Syria about 1600 B.C. In his letter to his brotherin-law Amenhetep III of Egypt he mentions his
brothers who bear the names Artashumara and
Artatama. His grandfather also was named Artatama.
Zarathushtra thus finds the stem arta or areta in vogue,
but we do not find him using it in the Gathas. He
uses its variant asha instead and makes it the basic
foundation for the structure of his moral philosophy.
The Later Avestan works follow him in their general
use of the word. It is in the Old Persian inscriptions,
however, that we find the use of arta as an element of
proper names. The Pahlavi writers make a more
frequent use of the arta form than of asha.

Asha stands for Ahura Mazda's righteousness.
Ahura Mazda is the father of Asha, says
Zarathushtra.95 He created Asha through his
wisdom.96 Asha is of one will with Ahura Mazda97 He
is the counsellor of Ahura Mazda,98 and lives in one
abode with Ahura Mazda and Vohu Manah.99 He is
given the attribute Vahishta, 'best'.100 It is not
employed in the Gathas [48] as his fixed title, as it
becomes in the later Avesta where Asha Vahishta is
used as a compound word.

95. Y44.3; Y47.2.
96. Y31.7, 8.
97. Y28.8, 29.7.
98. Y46.17.
99. Y44.9.
100. Y28.8.

The Vedic poet asks why does the sun fall not from
the sky, why do waters of the rivers flowing into the
ocean not fill it, where do the stars go during the day
and similar questions pertaining to the working of the
cosmic order in nature. Zarathushtra, in like manner, 101. Y44.3.
asks Ahura Mazda to tell him who is the father of
Asha, the embodiment of the order ruling the world, 102. Y44.4.
who has determined the path of the sun and the stars,
and by whom does the moon wax and wane,101 who 103. Y44.5.
upholds the earth and the firmament from falling,
who has made waters and plants and who has given 104. Y50.10.
swiftness to winds and clouds,102 who has made light
and darkness, and morning and noon and night.103 In 105. Y32.2.
one place we find him telling Ahura Mazda that the
sun and the dawn take their course for his
glorification through Asha.104 Asha's one epithet is
the shining one.105
A few passages lead us to trace some connection
106. Y33.6.
between Asha and the ritualistic order. Zarathushtra
speaks of himself as a zaotar, Vedic hotar, sacrificing 107. Y34.3.
priest, and says that he learns the straight or orderly
way through Asha.106 Ceremonial offerings are made 108. Y51.22.
unto Ahura Mazda and Asha.107 Ahura Mazda knows

those who are best in the celebration of the Yasna
sacrifice according to Asha.108 The devout make
ceremonial offerings to Asha along with Ahura
Mazda.109

109. Y34.3.

Zarathushtra best exemplifies Asha's righteousness
in his life. Zarathushtra is pure in body, mind, and
spirit. He is the embodiment of good thoughts, good
words, and good deeds. He thinks, speaks, and acts
righteousness. He lives in the atmosphere of
righteousness and radiates it all around him. He is the
very righteousness itself living in flesh for the good
of mankind. Righteousness sustains him in his
hardships and trials. When his great prophetic work
is beset with untold difficulties; when the prophet of
Ahura faces opposition on all sides; when friends
110. Y28.6.
desert his company and kinsmen abandon his cause;
when the rulers of the land look upon him with
suspicion and the wicked seek to compass his ruin;
when, friendless and forsaken, hissed and hooted,
ridiculed and persecuted, he roams about the villages
[49] and towns of Iran, he turns his eager eyes to
Mazda and Asha in search of inward peace, and
obtains it.110 Reduced to the verge of the direst
poverty, Zarathushtra does not seek earthly riches,
but the imperishable wealth of the spirit, that is,
righteousness.
Righteousness is the pivot around which the ethics
of Zarathushtra revolves. Asha is the highest word
in the Zoroastrian terminology, and its derivative
ashavan forms the epithet of the man who is most
saintly and possesses the noblest character. The term
is applied to Ahura Mazda, Zarathushtra, and to all
who are religious. Righteousness is the will of Ahura
Mazda; it is the rule of man's duty, and to be

righteous is synonymous with being religious. The
law of righteousness is the norm to which the faithful
has to conform his life in this world. Good thoughts,
good words, and good deeds form the ethical
foundation upon which righteousness rests and the
basis upon which the entire structure of the system of
the Mazdayasnian philosophy is reared. This noble
truth, at once so pithy and simple, is accessible to all.
It does not appeal to the intellectual few and leave
aside the ignorant many; nor does it remain the
prerogative of a few thinkers and philosophers; but it
can reach all and become the cherished possession of
the prince and peasant alike. Every Zoroastrian child
imbibes the triad of good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds at its mother's breast.
Zarathushtra longs to see Asha. Zarathushtra yearns 111. Y28.3.
to make Asha his own along with Ahura Mazda and 112. Y28.5.
113. Y43.10.
Vohu Manah.111 He longs to see Asha and his
114. Y50.9.
heavenly associates.112 He is eager to behold him
113
coming with the devotion of Armaiti. Through the 115. Y33.7.
116. Y53.3.
deeds prompted by the good thoughts of Vohu
Manah he aspires to reach Asha.114 He implores Asha 117. Y51.17.
to come unto him along with Ahura Mazda and Vohu 118. Y46.12.
Manah.115 He advises his daughter Pouruchisti to seek 119. Y53.5.
fellowship with Asha.116 He prays that Hvogva may 120. Y46.15.
121. Y48.11.
make Asha her own.117 He longs for the day when
122. Y49.9.
Asha will come among the Fryan nobility through
118
123. Y51.10.
Armaiti. He counsels marrying couples that as
husbands and wives they should strive to excel one 124. Y28.7.
125. Y29.8.
another in their pursuit of Asha.119 Asha is
126. Y28.4.
approached through the practice of noble deeds
127. Y32.6.
according to the primeval laws ordained by Ahura
120
128. Y28.11.
[50] Mazda. Zarathushtra looks for devotion to
come with Asha among his followers.121 Those who 129. Y48.8.
live in communion with Asha reap the best reward.122 130. Y31.22.

Zarathushtra prays for the blessings of Asha.123 Asha 131. Y31.16.
132. Y33.3.
is asked to grant that blessing which forms the
124
reward of Vohu Manah. Zarathushtra, says Ahura
Mazda, is the one man who has heard the divine
commandments and undertaken to live and work for
the furtherance of Asha's righteousness.125 The
prophet of Ahura Mazda declares that as long as he
shall have vigour and strength he will urge all to
yearn for Asha,126 and work for the spread of Asha's
precepts.127 He adds further that he shall protect
Asha's righteousness all his life.128 The pious
everywhere welcome Asha's manifestation,129 and the
wise uphold him through their words and deeds.130
Whoso spreads Asha's righteousness in the house and
district is like unto Ahura Mazda.131 Those that are
best unto the righteous ones shall be in the pastures
of Asha and Vohu Manah.132
133. Y45.8.
Asha's work. Zarathushtra knows Ahura Mazda
through Asha.133 He prays for the good deeds of the 134. Y28.1.
Holy Spirit and the wisdom of Vohu Manah.134 He 135. Y28.6.
asks Ahura Mazda to give help through Asha,135 and 136. Y28.10.
beseeches him to grant the desires of those who are 137. Y43.2.
138. Y46.2.
devoted to Asha.136 Ahura Mazda gives riches of
139. Y48.7.
Vohu Manah through Asha,137 and Zarathushtra
138
140. Y33.7.
seeks to learn how the riches can be obtained.
Those who put down violence and strife gain Vohu 141. Y33.12.
Manah's reward through Asha.139 He is implored to 142. Y46.10.
come through Asha and Vohu Manah,140 and asked to 143. Y31.5.
144. Y28.2.
give mighty power through Asha.141 Those who
145. Y44.8.
practise righteousness win power as reward from
142
Ahura Mazda through Vohu Manah. Zarathushtra 146. Y31.13.
147. Y45.9.
asks Ahura Mazda what reward will be given him
143
through Asha and Vohu Manah. These rewards are 148. Y44.15.
the blessings of both worlds given by Ahura Mazda 149. Y45.10.
150. Y43.6.
through Asha.144 Zarathushtra asks Asha together

with Vohu Manah about the rules of life that lead to 151. Y44.1
happiness.145 Ahura Mazda sees open and secret faults 152. Y34.12.
of men through [51] Asha146 Kinship with Vohu
153. Y29.2, 3, 6.
Manah is sought through Asha.147 Ahura Mazda
154. Y46.9.
155. Y28.6.
wields power between the rival factions of
148
righteousness and wickedness through Asha.
156. Y28.9.
Through Asha and Vohu Manah Ahura Mazda
apportions vigour and durability, weal and
immortality unto those who practise righteousness
and good thinking.149 Through Asha's righteousness
does the world prosper by deeds prompted by Vohu
Manah's good thoughts.150 Through Asha again is
Ahura Mazda's help sought that Vohu Manah may
come.151 Ahura Mazda is implored to reveal
knowledge of the path of Vohu Manah through
Asha.152 The creator of the world confers with Asha
to know about a lord who can alleviate the sufferings
of the kine.153 Zarathushtra seeks to know through
Vohu Manah what Asha said to the creator.154 Ahura
Mazda is asked to give long life which is Asha's
gift.155 The pious declare that they will never provoke
the wrath of Asha.156
Ahura Mazda asks Zarathushtra to seek information 157. Y43.12.
from Asha.157 Asha gives counsel to those who listen 158. Y51.11.
to him.158 Wisdom exalts communities through
159. Y34.14.
159
Asha's righteousness. Ahura Mazda knows what is 160. Y45.4.
best for man in this life through Asha.160 He teaches 161. Y48.3.
his best doctrines through Asha.161 Armaiti is asked to 162. Y33.13.
enlighten the conscience of men through Asha.162
163. Y34.10.
Men of good understanding know Armaiti's devotion 164. Y46.16.
as the source of Asha's righteousness.163 Asha and
165. Y51.16.
164
Armaiti are united in the heavenly realms. Ahura 166. Y51.1
Mazda has devised his creed with Asha that
167. Y33.11.
Vishtaspa embraces.165 Asha gives power to his
168. Y44.20.
166
zealous adherents. He furthers men's
169. Y46.4.

170. Y48.6.
possessions.167 Men make the pastures prosper
through the practice of Asha's righteousness.168 The 171. Y51.5.
wicked strive to hinder the good work of those who 172. Y44.18.
further Asha's righteousness by prospering the cattle
by their diligence.169 Ahura Mazda created plants for
the cattle.170 Diligent persons gain cattle through
Asha.171 The prophet is awarded precious animals and
weal and immortality by Ahura Mazda through
Asha.172
[52] The path of righteousness. The Rig Veda refers
to the path of rta.173 The Gathas similarly speak of the
path of Asha, righteousness, and the idea, as we shall
see later, is developed in the Later Avesta. The path
of righteousness leads to paradise and the wicked
souls, we are told, tremble at the Bridge of Judgment
because they have deviated from the path of Asha
through their words and deeds.174 Ahura Mazda
dwells in the straight paths and Zarathushtra seeks
their knowledge through Asha.175 Deviation from the
173. RV. 8.31.13.
path of righteousness spells man's destruction.
Zarathushtra exhorts his hearers that every man and
174. Y51.13.
woman is free to choose for himself or herself the
path of righteousness or the path of wickedness. The
175. Y33.5, 6.
decision between the two ways of life rests with the
individual. Man is the arbiter of his destiny. He has
the power and freedom to choose between truth and
falsehood, righteousness and wickedness, good and
evil. He is responsible for the moral choice he makes
and is consequently responsible for his actions. If he
makes the right choice and embraces righteousness,
he will reap its reward, but if, as a free agent, he
chooses wickedness, the accountability will be his
and his own daena or self will lead him to retribution.
The discipline of the individual in righteousness.

176. Y46.6.

The prophet inculcates righteousness in his
teachings, and strictly enjoins his followers to combat 177. Y33.5.
wickedness. By his birthright man belongs to the
world of righteousness and is sent into this world for
its furtherance and for the destruction of the world of
wickedness. He is a friend of the righteous and their
righteousness, but a foe of the wicked and their
wickedness. It is expressly said that he alone is
righteous who is a friend to the righteous; but he
who, through maudlin sentimentality, is good unto
the wicked and palliates his wickedness is to be
considered wicked, for by failing to do his duty he
puts a premium on wickedness.176 To condone evil in
a wicked person is a capitulation to evil. Before the
individual sets out to fight wickedness in the outer
world, he has first to establish order in his inner
world. Concord and not discord, order and not
disorder, righteousness, and not wickedness, should
be his constant inward experience. With strict
discipline he has to work for the spiritual
development of his self. He is taught to subjugate his
passions, [53] eradicate evil thoughts from his mind,
and conquer the animal in him by an incessant
warfare with the forces of wickedness. The path of
righteousness leads to the abode of Ahura Mazda.177
But the path is not without its difficulties and trials.
Firm resolution, strong will, and sustained effort are
required before one can successfully tread it and
reach the final goal. It needs no effort to be wicked
and be a passive victim of the flesh, but it does take a
hero to be righteous and live for the spirit. There are
tempting pitfalls and alluring snares that beguile the
devotee and lead him astray to the path of
wickedness. The quest is fraught with great
difficulties. But then the prize it brings is also
matchless. The goal is not easy to reach. Many more

are the chances of misses than of hits, and the
aspirant has to try again and again before he can
successfully strike the mark. Our attempt may prove
fruitless for the time being, but there is merit in
having aimed at realizing the ideal. If we win, it is
good. If we lose, it is also good.
Man has to keep himself pure and clean bodily,
mentally, and spiritually. Purity of body and mind is
the best thing for man in life.178 It strengthens
righteousness and sanctity. The blending of the
virtues of Vohu Manah and Armaiti in the life of man
makes him righteous. The fusion of the noble
qualities both of the head and heart make the
individual righteous. Vohu Manah purifies the mind,
Armaiti sanctifies the heart. Vohu Manah's
knowledge enlightens the world, Armaiti's devotion
ennobles it. Without knowledge man is poor indeed,
but without devotion he courts death in spirit.
Knowledge teaches the spirit the philosophy of life,
178. Y48.5.
devotion lends to the spirit the zest to act it, and the
true religion begins with this acting. The philosopher
may think of Ahura Mazda, the metaphysician may
speculate about his origin, but the devout actually
imitates him in action. Knowledge gives a right view
of life, teaches man about his relations to his
Heavenly Father and the universe, and creates ideals
for him; but devotion strives to realize these.
Knowledge is good, wisdom is better; but wisdom
tinged with devotion is best. The wise knows Mazda,
the devout owns Mazda; and the blending of the
virtues of both makes man the consummate one, the
saint, the ashavan or righteous one.
[54] Righteousness will win over wickedness. The 179. Y49.3.
creed of Asha leads to felicity, whereas the opposite

way of wickedness brings destruction.179 Those who 180. Y31.1.
follow the ways of wickedness destroy the world of
Asha's righteousness.180 Zarathushtra seeks from Asha 181. Y31.4.
and his heavenly associates power with which he and
his followers may smite wickedness.181 Asha's
182. Y34.9.
righteousness leaves evil doers who embrace not
devotion and good thinking, just as wild beasts flee 183. Y34.8.
from men.182 Vohu Manah leaves those who think
not of Asha.183 Ahura Mazda is invoked to teach how 184. Y44.13.
the faithful can drive away the Druj and those
persons who, in defiance of the divine precepts,
185. Y44.14.
184
follow not Asha. The prophet asks Ahura Mazda
how best he can put wickedness in the hands of
186. Y30.8.
righteousness and bring punishment unto those who
embrace wickedness.185 Vohu Manah will establish
187. Y46.3.
the divine kingdom of Ahura Mazda for those who
vanquish wickedness and deliver it into the hands of 188. Y48.1, 2.
Asha.186 The world will ultimately embrace
righteousness through the efficacious teachings of
the Saviours of the world and Ahura Mazda is asked
to declare when that happy day will dawn over the
world.187 Zarathushtra tells Ahura Mazda that his
divine purpose will be accomplished and his name
will be glorified when as ordained by him both men
and demons will see at the end of the world that Asha
triumphs and his righteousness smites wickedness and
the world will be blessed with the happy tidings.188
He fervently hopes for the period when every
individual in his or her own capacity will embrace
and act righteousness and will thus make the entire
world of humanity gravitate towards Asha. In this
consists the final victory of good over evil, and the
Divine Kingdom of Ahura Mazda will come when
righteousness wholly pervades the universe. All,
therefore, have to contribute to this mighty work.
The righteous ones living in different ages and at

different places form the members of one righteous
group, inasmuch as they are all actuated by one and
the same motive and work for the common cause.
Though differentiated by time and place, as also by
their respective tenements of clay, they are one in
spirit, and work for the inauguration of the Kingdom
of Righteousness.
[55] Fire is the visible symbol of righteousness.
Zarathushtra says that the best offerings that the
pious can make to the fire of Ahura Mazda are the
righteous deeds inspired by Asha and proclaims that
189. Y43.9.
as long as he has vitality left in him he will think of
Asha whenever he will carry his gift of adoration
190. Y46.7.
unto fire.l89 Through the fire and the thought of
Ahura Mazda, he says, he will find protection against
the Evil Spirit and his evil machinations and it is
through them that Asha's righteousness will thrive.190
Physical impurity is removed by fire and
Zarathushtra employs this emblem of purification in
the eschatological sense to burn and destroy spiritual
uncleanliness or sin. Thus will the fire be the great
purifier of souls steeped in wickedness. Through Asha
191. Y31.3, 19.
and fire will Ahura Mazda give his final award unto
the good and the evil.191 Asha and Armaiti will help
192. Y47.6.
Ahura Mazda when he will separate the righteous
from the wicked through his fire.192 The fire of Ahura
193. Y34.4.
Mazda is mighty through Asha and will bring
manifest joy unto the righteous but a visible harm
194. Y43.4.
unto the wicked.193 Ahura Mazda's might and
holiness, says Zarathushtra, will be manifest when he
will deal out the destinies unto the righteous and the
wicked through the glow of fire strengthened by
Asha.194

KHSHATHRA
The sovereign power of Ahura Mazda. One of the
first attributes that man learns to discern in the
heavenly beings is their might or power. It is manifest
in their activities as creatures, sustainers, and rulers.
The ancestors of the Indo-Iranians called it kshatra,
and applied it to Mitra, Varuna, Indra, and the
195. Y31.22; 48.8.
Adityas. Zarathushtra, we find, adopts it in its Iranian
form khshathra and uses it in its ordinary meaning,
196. Y51.2.
power, or applies it specifically to divine power,
symbolized in the Kingdom of Ahura Mazda. He
197. Y43.13; 51.1.
gives it the epithet vohu and calls it vohu khshathra, 'the
Good Kingdom,195 or speaks of it as khshathra ishtoish,
198. Y44.7.
'the Kingdom of Desire,'196 or names it Khshathra
vairya, [56] 'the Wished for Kingdom.'197 Ahura
Mazda has created Khshathra.198 In the post-Gathic
period the compound Khshathra Vairya gains ground
and is always used as the name of the archangel
representing Ahura Mazda's divine majesty.
Zarathushtra exhorts mankind to work for the
establishment of the Kingdom of Ahura Mazda. The 199. Y45.9.
creator, ruler, and sovereign lord of both the worlds
is Ahura Mazda. The pious invoke him to lead them 200. Y48.11.
to work in his kingdom upon earth for the prosperity
of men and their cattle.199 They pray that they may 201. Y34.3.
get happy homes, rich in pastures, attended by
202. Y51.21.
Khshathra.200 All creatures prosper in Mazda's
201
Kingdom through Vohu Manah, and through him
again Ahura Mazda gives Khshathra's power to the 203. Y33.14.
good.202 Nobler than the sphere of earthly riches is
Khshathra's domain of spiritual riches. Ahura Mazda 204. Y28.3.
rules over his earthly kingdom and prepares mankind
for his celestial kingdom of perfection and goodness 205. Y31.4.
that is yet to be. Despite its much good, this world

harbours in its midst much that is evil. Man's work in
this life is to fight and rout the forces of evil.
Zarathushtra had laid the foundation of the Divine
Kingdom and has assigned to man the stupendous
task of building and establishing the ideal kingdom in
which good alone will exist. Evil lurks in man and
through man bestrides the world. It is his duty to
cleanse his inner nature of all impurity and eradicate
evil from the world without. Zarathushtra is hopeful
and confident that one day evil will not be. It is left
to man to bring that day near or keep it at a distance.
It is in his hands to accomplish it now or keep it long
in the coming. The prophet of Ahura Mazda is in
earnest and eager to hasten its advent. He asserts,
with repeated emphasis, that the Kingdom is near at
hand, if only mankind sets about zealously and
strenuously to inaugrate it. He passionately exhorts
his hearers not to waver, not to be staggered by the
formidable nature of the task, but to aspire and work
and struggle and fight for it with body and mind,
heart and soul. With deep religious fervour he sings
that he is ready to lay down the life of his body to
lead mankind to work for the advancement of the
Kingdom in obedience to the commandments of
Ahura Mazda.203 With Ahura Mazda on his side, [57]
he makes the good thoughts of Vohu Manah and
righteousness of Asha his own and, with the burning
devotion of Armaiti, he works for the advent of the
imperishable Kingdom.204 Triumph of righteousness
over wickedness will usher in the Kingdom and he
prays for strength for himself and his followers so
that they may wage a successful war against
wickedness.205
The pious pray that they may participate in the
inauguration of the Kingdom of Mazda.206 Vohu

206. Y51.2.

Manah, the guardian of good thoughts, furthers the 207. Y30.8; 31.6.
Kingdom.207 As right thinking is the source of good
conduct and endeavour to work for the advent of the 208. Y46.16.
Divine Kingdom, it is sometimes spoken of as
belonging to Vohu Manah. The Kingdom, it is said, 209. Y34.11.
is in the possession of Vohu Manah and Ahura
Mazda and Asha and Armaiti live in it.208 The
210. Y51.1.
Kingdom of Vohu Manah is furthered by Asha's
righteousness.209 To be worthy of entering the Divine 211. Y43.14.
Kingdom and living in it is man's highest aspiration.
Asha assures the life in the Kingdom to those who
212. Y48.8.
work zealously for the furtherance of
righteousness.210 Through righteousness is the divine 213. Y43.13.
help gained in Mazda's Kingdom.211 Zarathushtra is
eager to enter the blessed Kingdom,212 and a long life 214. Y43.8.
of felicitous existence in it,213 and to share its
splendours.214 Wise Jamaspa courts the life of
215. Y51.18.
righteousness and longs for the Kingdom as the gift
of Vohu Manah.215 Zarathushtra prays that
216. Y49.8.
Frashaoshtra may win the Kingdom of Ahura Mazda
for all time;216 He asks Ahura Mazda to manifest unto 217. Y33.13.
him the incomparable things that mankind will
witness in the Divine Kingdom as the reward of
218. Y46.10.
Vohu Manah.217 Ahura Mazda is asked to give the
Kingdom through Vohu Manah as reward to those
whom he knows to be doing what is best in life.218
The Divine Kingdom in the world of perfection.
Vohu Manah will proclaim the advent of the
Kingdom.219 Ahura Mazda has ordained through
Vohu Manah and Asha to give unto the good
perfection and immortality in his Kingdom.220
Through [58] Khshathra he apportions the destinies
unto the good and the evil according to their
deserts.221 The pious yearn for the presence of Ahura
Mazda with Vohu Manah, Asha, and Khshathra

219. Y44.6.
220. Y45.10.
221. Y45.7.
222. Y50.4.
223. Y43.6.

when they enter the paradisiacal Abode of Song.222
Ahura Mazda will come at the final goal
224. Y34.15.
accompanied by his Holy Spirit, Vohu Manah, Asha,
Khshathra, and Armaiti.223 With evil eradicated and
imperfection at an end, the world that will emerge on
the occasion of the establishment of the Divine
Kingdom will be altogether a new world, a perfect
world.224
Khshathra's sphere over metals. Ahura Mazda has
created the earth rich in soil and has filled its bowels
with untold mineral wealth and has desired that
mankind should thrive and prosper through the
riches obtained by their diligence and labour. Wealth
is the natural concomitant of all earthly kingdoms.
All earthly and spiritual riches therefore are
embodied in Khshathra. The later Avestan texts
assign the guardianship of metals, the visible token of 225. Y30.7; 32.7.
wealth, to Khshathra. The Gathas are silent over the
connection of Khshathra with metals. The ordeal of 226. Y51.9.
molten metal does however play a prominent part in
cleansing the world of all moral impurities to make
way for the coming of Khshathra's Kingdom. Ahura
Mazda knows best the retributions that will take
place through the molten metal.225 The righteous will
reap their final reward and the wicked will meet with
their retribution when Ahura Mazda will judge them
through the molten metal.226
ARMAITI
The feminine abstraction of Ahura Mazda's
devotion. Armaiti is cognate with Vedic Aramati,
who is a shadowy personification of piety or
devotion, She retains the same meaning in the
Gathas and is emblematic of Ahura Mazda's love or

227. Y44.7.
228. Y31.9.

devotion. Ahura Mazda created her,227 and she is
lovingly called his daughter,228 or again, his own.229
Holy or spenta, which is her standing epithet in the
later period, is applied to her sometimes in the
Gathas.
Zarathushtra's soul is wedded to Ahura Mazda
through Armaiti's devotion. Through fervent
meditation on his own [59] inner nature and patient
study of Ahura' Mazda's marvellous work in creation,
Zarathushtra understands the ways of Ahura Mazda.
He knows the wise lord through the enlightenment
of his mind. His heart yearns to own Ahura Mazda.
From the depth of his heart, he prays unto him,
invokes him in silence and with the pronounced
words of his mouth. He burns incense of devotion
unto his maker upon the fire burning on the altar in
the holy temple of his heart. The fire first flares and
230. Y44.11.
flickers, then blazes and burns, and illumines the
sublime path that leads to Ahura Mazda. He
dedicates his will and his desire and his heart and his 231. Y32.2.
life and himself unto him. He loses himself in
232. Y31.1.
devoted love for him. He sees with Ahura Mazda's
eyes and hears with Ahura Mazda's ears. He
communes with him and he becomes one with him.
He is eager that his hearers should share the
incomparable gift of Armaiti with him. With earnest
longing he asks Ahura Mazda when Armaiti's
devotion will ennoble the lives of those to whom he
proclaims his faith.230 The members of different ranks
of Iranian society that have embraced his religion
fervently pray that the good and holy Armaiti may be
theirs.231 Those who have devoutly accepted the
commandments of Ahura Mazda are eager to devote
their hearts unto him.232

Armaiti's work. Armaiti teaches the ordinances of
Ahura Mazda.233 She furthers the imperishable
Kingdom of Ahura Mazda.234 Those who make
Armaiti's devotion their own, becomes holy.235
Armaiti blesses them with plenty and prosperity.236
Ahura Mazda is asked to give vigour through her.237
Zarathushtra asks the faithful to exalt Ahura Mazda
with devotional prayers.238 His religion inspires
truthful deeds through the words of Armaiti.239 In the
Vedas we find Aramati linked with rta, that is,
devotion in connection with the moral order.240 So
we are told in the Gathas that Asha's righteousness is
furthered by Armaiti.241 As righteousness is the
outcome of the life of Armaiti's devotion, the wise
one bases his conduct upon her inspiration.242 The
prophet asks Frashaoshtra to lead the faithful to the
life of communion with Asha's righteousness and
[60] Armaiti's devotion.243 For the union of both
furthers the Kingdom of Vohu Manah244 The coming
of Asha and Armaiti to inspire their lives is eagerly
sought by the pious.245 Armaiti inquires after the
misdeeds and shortcomings of the true speaker and
the false speaker, the wise and the ignorant.246 The
wicked Bendva, the inveterate foe of the prophet,
does not follow Armaiti.247 Righteousness deserts
those who know Armaiti as the beloved of Ahura
Mazda, and yet estrange themselves from her
devotion.248 Zarathushtra asks her to give him and
Vishtaspa their heart's desire.249 He implores her to
teach men's consciences through righteousness.250
She is besought to grant as a gift the riches of the life
of Vohu Manah's good thoughts.251 One serves the
Most Holy Spirit the best by the performance of the
deeds inspired by Armaiti's devotion.252 Armaiti is
invoked to send righteous sovereigns and not wicked

233. Y28.3.
235. Y51.21.
236. Y49.5.
237. Y33.12.
238. Y44.10.
240. RV. 5.43.6.
241. Y44.6.
242. Y34.10.

243. Y46.16.
244. Y34.11.
245. Y43.10; 48.11.
246. Y31.12.
247. Y49.2.
248. Y34.9.
249. Y28.7.
250. Y33.13.
251. Y43.1.

ones to rule over the world.253 Armaiti will co-operate 252. Y47.2
with Ahura Mazda at the final dispensation.254
253. Y48.5.
254. Y47.6.
Armaiti's relation to the earth. Sayana glosses
Aramati by bhûmi, 'earth'. Armaiti plays a prominent
part as the genius of earth in the later Avestan period.
Though the Gathas do not clearly emphasize this
aspect of her work, we can trace in them the belief in
Armaiti's connection with the earth. Zarathushtra
preaches the usefulness of settled agricultural life as 255. Y31.9.
opposed to the nomadic life prevailing in his days.
He says that Ahura Mazda has laid out the beneficent 255a. Y46.12.
path of agriculture and asks men to choose it. Armaiti
is here conjointly mentioned with Geush Tashan.255 256. Y47.3.
The noble descendants of the Turanian Fryana,
prompted by righteousness, further the settlements of
Armaiti through their diligence.255a The Maker has, in
consultation with Vohu Manah, the genius of cattle,
created Armaiti or earth and replenished it with
pastures.256
HAURVATAT AND AMERETAT
The inseparable pair of perfection and immortality.
Haurvatat and Ameretat form an indissoluble spiritual
pair and are always celebrated together in the
Gathas. No single hymn [61] is addressed to
Haurvatat or to Ameretat alone. Haurvata means or
perfection, and Ameretat is emblematic of
immortality. The dual earthly gift of endurance and
vigour of body is paralleled with the heavenly
blessings of perfection and immortality.257 Ahura
Mazda bestows through Vohu Manah and Asha

257. Y33.8; 34.11;
51.7.
258. Y33.8.
260. Y31.6.
261. Y44.17.
262. Y44.18.

endurance and vigour of body in this world and
Haurvatat's perfection and Ameretat's immortality in 263. Y31.21.
the next, upon those who offer him the sacrifice of
265. Y47.1.
devotion.258 The earthly boons are the gifts of
259
Haurvatat and Ameretat. Whoso piously
pronounces the sacred formulas dedicated to
266. Y32.5.
260
Haurvatat and Ameretat receives the best reward.
Through the recital of these holy words and basing
their lives upon righteousness, do the faithful win for
themselves the blessings of Haurvatat and
Ameretat.261 Zarathushtra fervently prays for the
participation in these blessings.262 Those who offer
willing obedience unto the teachings of the prophet
will attain unto Haurvatat and Ameretat.263 He who
befriends Ahura Mazda with his thoughts and words
and deeds wins them for himself.264 Man comes by
them in Ahura Mazda's Kingdom through his good
thoughts, words, and deeds, and his life of
righteousness and devotion.265 It is the wicked who
defraud mankind of happy life and immortality by
means of evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.266
Water and plants form the province of Haurvatat
and Ameretat. The Gathas hint at the connection of
Haurvatat and Ameretat with water and plants, over
whom they preside in the Later Avesta. Ahura Mazda 267. Y51.7.
who has created water and plants is invoked to give
Haurvatat's perfection and Ameretat's immortality.267 268. Y34.11.
On the eschatological side Haurvatat figuratively
represents ambrosia and Ameretat stands for nectar
that the pious souls receive in heaven.268
SRAOSHA
269. Y28.5.
Sraosha is obedience to the religious lore. In the
later period, Sraosha rises to great prominence as the

divine teacher [62] of Mazda's religion. Zarathushtra
longs to see Sraosha",269 and prays that he may come
unto every man whom Mazda Wills.270 The prophet
teaches the new faith to the world of humanity. He
exhorts mankind to pay heed to the words that are
best for the mortals to hear and tells them that Ahura
Mazda will give them perfection and immortality if
they will bring Sraosha's obedience unto him.271 By
teaching mankind to obey the ordinances of Ahura
Mazda, and inspiring them to work according to
them, through good thoughts, words, and deeds for
the furtherance of righteousness in the world,
Zarathushtra helps in the inauguration of the Divine
Kingdom of Ahura Mazda.272 In the later period
Sraosha acts as a co-assessor with Mithra and Rashnu,
who all combine to make up a heavenly tribunal for
the judgment of the dead. Mithra and Rashnu, the
two brother judges, seated with Sraosha, do not
appear in the Gathas, but a passage speaks of
Sraosha's coming as a judge with the reward unto the
good and evil contending parties.273 Zarathushtra
invokes Sraosha as the greatest of the heavenly
beings to appear at the final consummation of the
world.274

270. Y44.16.
271. Y45.5.
272. Y33.14.
273. Y43.12.
274. Y33.5.

The word sraosha occurs also in several Gathic
passages in its ordinary meaning of obedience, and
not as the personified spirit of this abstract virtue.
ATAR
The fire cult. Atar or fire corresponds to the Vedic
Agni Atar's functions are elaborately delineated in
the Later Avesta. We shall therefore leave the
discussion of the resemblance between them for
subsequent pages. The early Aryan settlers of Iran
had brought the cult to their new home as their

275. Bd.17.5-8.
276. Jackson, Zoroaster,
p. 98-100.

cherished heritage bequeathed to them by their IndoIranian ancestors. Tradition speaks of several great
sacred Iranian fires consecrated by the preZoroastrian kings. The Pahlavi Bundahishn says that
Yima and Kavi Haosrava established the fires Froba
and Goshasp; and that Vishtaspa, the royal patron of
Zarathushtra, consecrated the fire Burzin Mihr.275
The Mohammedan writers of the tenth century speak
of some ten such places dedicated [63] to fire before
Zoroaster's time.275a The prophet of Iran thus found
the cult of fire already established in Iran when he
entered upon his divine mission on earth. He purified
its archaic form and incorporated it into his new
system. Of all the elements, he raised fire, or light, to
a place of the highest distinction in his faith.
Ahura Mazda is eternal light, his very nature is light.
He lives in the everlasting lights of the highest
heaven. Light in its various manifestations, whether
as the fire of the hearth on earth, or the fiery
substance in the bowels of the earth, or as the genial
glow of the sun in the azure vault of heaven, or the
silvery sheen of the crescent moon in the sky, or the
flickering brilliancy of the stars in the firmament, or
even in the form of the life-giving energy distributed
in the entire creation, is emblematic of Mazda. No
wonder, then, if the prophet of Ancient Iran made
fire the consecrated symbol of his religion, a symbol
which in point of sublimity, grandeur, and purity, or
in its being the nearest earthly image of the heavenly
lord, is unequalled by any of its kind in the world.
When Vohu Manah approaches Zarathushtra, and
276a. Y43.9.
enquires of him what is his most ardent desire, the
prophet replies that his inmost yearning is to think of 277. Y46.7. [i.e. the
righteousness through the devotional gifts of his
famous phrase "Kem-

homage to Atar's fire.276a When the chosen of the
Lord is thwarted at times in his great mission by the
Druj or Lie, he turns to Atar as one of the protectors
that will best help him in the furtherance of the
mighty cause of righteousness.277 The fire of Mazda
plays an important part in the work of the last
judgment at the final Renovation of the world.
Mazda has promised through Asha that he will give
award unto the contesting parties of good and evil
through fire.278 The Heavenly Father will deliver his
final judgment upon the righteous and the wicked
through fire together with the Holy Spirit.279 It is
through fire that the creator will bestow profit upon
the righteous and bring harm unto the wicked.280
Mazda will apportion reward and retribution to both
the good and the evil through the glow of fire, which
is emblematic of righteousness.281 The believers
therefore pray that fire, which is mighty through
righteousness, may [64] be a manifest help unto the
faithful, but a veritable harm unto the foe.282 The
noble truth of the prophetic words of Zarathushtra
will, in this manner, be vindicated when, at the final
Dispensation, divine judgment shall be meted out to
man through the red fire of Mazda.283

na Mazda" etc. -JHP
278. Y31.3.
279. Y47.6.
280. Y51.9.
281. Y43.4.
282. Y34.4.
283. Y31.19.

ASHI
The feminine abstraction of sanctity. Ashi represents 284. Y51.10.
sanctity and destiny, or reward. In one passage she is
285. Y51.10.
given the epithet vanghuhi, 'good',284 which in the
Later Avesta is inseparably associated with her name.
She represents the life of piety and its concomitant 286. Y34.12.
result. Zarathushtra invokes Asha to come with
287. Y31.4.
Ashi.285 She apportions Mazda's ordinances, about
which the prophet desires to learn.286 He invokes her
288. Y50.3.
in his crusade against Druj, or the Lie.287 Whoso,
through the power that Ashi confers upon him,

deprives the wicked of his possessions, reaps the
rewards that Mazda has promised.288
In an eschatological sense, she forms the reward
assured in heaven to those who have led a life of
sanctity upon earth. It is with the accompaniment of
289. Y43.12.
Ashi's recompense that Sraosha approaches the seat
of judgment to reward the righteous and wicked
290. Y33.13.
souls289 Zarathushtra asks Ahura Mazda to manifest
unto him the incomparable things of his Divine
291. Y48.8.
Kingdom which are rewards of Vohu Manah,290 and
seeks to know the reward that will be his in the Good
Kingdom.291
Ashi's sphere of activity grows in the later
development of her cult and, in addition to
representing the reward of the pious in heaven, she
stands also for the earthly prize of those who are
diligent. She becomes the genius of fortune, and the
eager eyes of her numerous votaries are always turned
to her for her favour. This new phase of her activity
will receive attention in the place assigned to her in
our treatment of the Later Avestan period.
GEUSH TASHAN AND GEUSH URVAN
The Fashioner of animal life. The Gathas speak of
three beings, Geush Tashan, 'the Creater of the Bull
or Cow,' Geush Urvan, 'the Soul of the Bull or Cow,'
and Gav Azi, 'the Bull [65] or Cow Azi.' Av. gav, and
Skt. go, both mean bull or cow. The Vedic divinities
Dyaus, 'the Heaven,' and Prithivi, 'the Earth,' have
the epithets bull and cow applied to them from their
physical characteristics.292 After the analogy of the
Skt. go, 'bull or cow,' which also means earth, some
are led to think that the above expressions are used
with reference to the earth.293 The Pahlavi, Sanskrit,

292. RV. 1. 160.3.
293. Haug, [Martin]
Essays on the Sacred
Language, Writings, and
Religion of the Parsis,
[London, 1907,] p.
148; Kanga, Gujarati
tr. of the Gathas;
Punegar, Eng. tr. of
the Gathas in the

Persian, and early Gujarati versionists, it may be
noted, adhere to the original meaning and explain
the words with reference to the bull or cow.

Journal of the K.R.
Cama Oriental
Institute, No. 12.

Some creation-myths of the world relate that the
earthly creatures have sprung from the bodies of the
primeval man or of the cosmic cow killed by the gods
or, as in the case of the later Zoroastrianism, by the
Evil Spirit. In Babylonian mythology it is Marduk
who killed Tiamat and the creatures came into
existence from his body. According to the Vedic
texts the gods sacrificed Purusha and brought the
earthly and aerial creatures into being from his body.
Ahriman, say the Pahlavi works, killed Gaya Maretan
[Av. 'Gayo-maretan,' Phl. 'Gayomard'], the Primeval
Man and Gavyokdat, the Primeval Bull, and men and
animals and plants came into being from the various
parts of their slaughtered bodies.
Cattle were the source of all wealth and the ox who
drew the plough and enabled man to cultivate his
field was held in religious veneration among the
pastoral and agricultural Aryans and Semites from
early times. Mithra was the most powerful IndoIranian divinity when Zarathushtra preached his new
religion. The Iranians worshipped Mithra as 'the lord
of wide pastures,' which is his standing epithet in the
Younger Avesta. According to the ancient myth
Mithra killed the Primeval Bull and thereby became
the creator and fashioner of the earthly beings. The
Mithraic sculptures represent him sitting on the bull's
back, seizing it by the nostrils with one hand and
plunging his hunting knife deep into its back.
Zarathushtra did not include him in the heavenly
hierarchy, but adapted the legend of the immolation
of the Primeval Bull by Mithra to ethical ends.294

294. See Cumont, The
Mysteries of Mithra, p.
132-137; Tiele, The
Religion of the Iranian
Peoples, tr. Nariman, p.
112-114; Moulton,
Early Religious Poetry of
Persia, p. 43, 88, 91,
92; Jones, Mithraism in
ERE. 8. 752; Gray, The
Foundations of the Iranian
Religions, p. 79-82,
146, 147.

[66] Geush Tashan stands in the Gathas for the
creative activity of Ahura Mazda. He is said to be
Ahura Mazda's own,295 and Mazda is spoken of as his
lord.296 Geush Urvan is the spirit of the animal
kingdom, and the obscure Gav Azi, who is spoken of
in the Gathas as the giver of joy and prosperity,
represents the animal creation. Tradition explains
Gav Azi as 'the three years old cow.' It is evidently
gav aevodâta, 'the sole created bull or cow,' of the
Later Avesta,297 and Gavyokdât, 'the Sole Created Bull'
of the Pahlavi and subsequent Sanskrit, Persian, and
Gujarati versionists.

295. Y31.9.
296. Y47.3.
297. Yt7.0; S1.12;
S2.12.

Zarathushtra declared the only mortal who could
assuage the sufferings of the kine. Geush Urvan
complains in a bewailing tone before Ahura Mazda
that anger, rapine, plunder, and wickedness are
harassing its very existence and therefore its soul
sighs for a deliverer.298 Ahura Mazda holds a celestial
conference to redress the grievances of the Soul of
the Kine. After patient deliberations, in which Vohu
298. Y29.1.
Manah, the genius of cattle, Asha, the guardian of
peaceful, settled life, and Geush Tashan take part,
299. Y29.2-8.
Vohu Manah, as the premier councillor, declares that
Zarathushtra is the only mortal who has heard the
300. Y29.9.
divine commands, and he is the one person suited to
be sent to the world as the spiritual and temporal lord
who could remove the grievances of Geush Urvan.299
The Soul of the Kine is disconsolate and cries in
despair that its sufferings are so great that it would be
beyond the power of the prophet to assuage them.300
Further pleadings soften its despair and Zarathushtra
is chosen for the mighty work.
We can see in this account an attempt to convince
the waverers, disbelievers, and heretics of the true

mission of the prophet. The later texts resort to
miracles of various sorts to fulfil the same purpose.
Those who have not yet come, in Gathic times, to
any definite conclusion as to the choice of their faith,
and are still hesitating before embracing the new
creed, are shown how preparations were made in
heaven for Zarathushtra's mission, and how it is with
the divine approval that the new prophet comes to
them for their good.
Zarathushtra preaches the advantages of a settled life,
and persuades his hearers to emerge from the pastoral
life and embrace [67] agricultural habits. He exhorts
them to work diligently for the kine's welfare, grow
fodder for their nurture, and lead an active and an
industrious life. This is a stage of transition, and all
could not easily give up the unsettled habits of life in
which they were brought up. Naturally, therefore,
there is much disorder in the land and Zarathushtra
enters upon his mission to establish ordered social
life.
Agriculture and cattle-tending bring prosperity.
Geush Tashan is mentioned along with Armaiti's
earth and Ahura Mazda shows the advantageous path
of the industrious agriculturist who tills the earth by
his diligence and prospers Vohu Manah's cattle,
whereas the indolent persons who do not practise
husbandry fail to reap the fruits of life.301 Ahura
Mazda has created cattle that give the good things of
life to men.302 Moreover, he has created Armaiti's
earth for the pasture of Geush Tashan.303 Whoso
wishes pasture of cattle reaps the reward for his
labour.304 Ahura Mazda fulfils the desire of the bodily
life of those who, inspired by Vohu Manah, work for
the welfare of the cattle.305 Unto those who lead

301. Y31.9, 10.
302. Y44.6.
303. Y47.3.
304. Y50.2.
305. Y34.14.
306. Y46.19.

righteous lives and work the will of Zarathushtra, will
be given in the next world happiness such as the
possession of cattle gives.306

[68]
NOTES:
CHAPTER VIII
PRAYERS AND RITUALS
Prayer is the heavenward soaring of the soul on
wordy wings. Man has always prayed. Primitive man
who did not understand natural phenomena
worshipped power in the invisible beings whom he
feared. He humbled and humiliated himself before
them, and strove to placate and mollify them. His
more enlightened descendants began worshipping
goodness or knowledge or righteousness in gods.
Prayer in its origin is instinctive and it gradually
grows rational and moral. Man has always wearied
God with his extravagant demands. He has prayed
that fortune may drop from the skies. He has fancied
gods would do miracles for him. And he has always
expected that gods should answer all his prayers. His
mental and moral progress has purified prayer.
Naturally, he prays for his health and vigour of body,
for food and riches, for offspring and long life. In his
nobler mood, he prays for purity of mind and heart.
He prays that God may strengthen him to fight
temptation, vice, and sin. When he falters and falls,
he feels contrition for his misdeeds, strips his heart
bare before God. and implores him to wipe out his
transgressions.
When his troubles are sleeping and the world smiles
upon him, man sometimes forgets that he owes the
happy turn in his life to God and prays not, or, if he
prays he prays with his lips what he disowns with his
heart. Some sorrow, some disaster throws him again

on his knees. When darkness and gloom hang heavily
upon him, when he is plunged into deep dejection,
when he is cast down by the sense of his utter
helplessness, when he thinks the world is giving way
beneath his feet then to God he turns for succour.
With uplifted hands and on bended knees, he
unburdens himself of his afflictions, seeks strength in
prayer and prays with his heart on his tongue. In his
infinite mercy, God beckons him near, softens his
bitterness, chases away his anxiety, strengthens him
to triumph over his hardships, and fortifies [69] him
against the assaults of vice and sin. The soothing
gleam of joy dawns on his sorrowful life and, with
God as his rock, he finds himself on safe soil.
Homage, invocation, sacrifice, and the outpouring of
prayer are the various expressions of the inward
longings of man to commune with the divine, to
enter into mutual intercourse with him. Those are
outlets through which man pours forth his heart to
the fountain of all bounty. The individual who
surrenders himself to unseen powers, who kneels
down in humility at the altar, who with uplifted
hands pays homage to the hidden forces behind the
rising sun or the waxing moon or the roaring ocean,
and who carries an offering to the fire or a libation to
the waters is psychologically greatly affected. Such
attitudes of spirit have great subjective value, for they
deeply influence man's character. Prayer is the
highest type of expression through which man
conveys to his Heavenly Father his feelings of joy
and sorrow, gratitude and love, hope and fear, or in
his hunger and thirst for the divine grace lays down
his grievances before him, confesses his guilt, craves
for help, seeks mercy. Devotion is the first requisite.
Mere mutterings of a few formulas with the lips,

while the heart does not pulsate with devotional
fervour, are no prayer. Where there is no such prayer,
there is no devotion; and where there is no devotion,
there is no religion.
A host of gods claimed man's homage. Gods were
bountiful and benevolent. Men prayed to them.
Prayers were mostly petitions for gifts of health, long
life, offspring, cattle, chariots, riches, and victory
over enemies. In Egypt prayers were offered to Amen
and Amen-Ra at Thebes, Re-Horus at Heliopolis,
Ptah at Memphis, who rose to great eminence and
drew a large concourse of worshippers to their
shrines. In Babylonia and Assyria hymns were
composed in honour of Marduk and Ashur, Shamash
and Anu, Nergal and Ninib, and other gods and
goddesses like Ishtar. Men and women humiliated
themselves, exalted the divinities, addressed them
with honorific epithets as wise, creators, powerful
and merciful, sang paeans to them and prayed to
them. Gods were bountiful and men prayed to them
for long life, numerous offspring, and wealth. The
Vedic Aryans invoked gods for specific gifts which
were in their power to bestow. Agni and Prajapati
were asked to grant them fulfilment of their desires
and to shower wealth upon them. Agni and the
Maruts [70] were asked to give heroic offspring and
prosperity. Men besought Agni to be near them for
their welfare and to be of easy access as a father is to
his son. The Adityas were invoked to lead them to
the path of pleasantness. Ushas was implored to give
them good luck and glory and riches. Indra was
besought to render them help in their conflict with
the black-skinned Dasyus and to enable them to ward
off their enemies. Indra and Varuna were asked to
confer upon them happiness and objects of their

desires. Yama was invoked to grant them long life
upon earth and happy life in the company of gods in
heaven. Men dreaded Rudra's wrath and prayed
humbly to avert his ill-will. Men prayed to gods and
sought protection against hostile demons who
worked for harm.
1. Y28.10.
Zarathushtra purifies prayer. Ahura Mazda hears
prayers even in thought. Righteous thinking is
prayer. Such prayer lifts man to Ahura Mazda. Potent 2. Y44.17.
is the power of prayer unto Ahura Mazda, says
Zarathushtra.1 Like unto Ahura Mazda, Zarathushtra 3. Y50.8.
addresses his prayers to Vohu Manah, Asha,
4. Y43.8.
Khshathra, and Armaiti, either as Ahura Mazda's
attributes or as the eternal beings representing holy
5. Y34.6.
virtues. He pours out his soul in passionate
supplication to Ahura Mazda and longs to win his
love.2 With hands lifted in fervent homage and with 6. Y34.2.
devotional hymns, he yearns to come to Ahura
Mazda.3 He praises and beseeches Ahura Mazda to 7. Y50.9.
be his own.4 Steeped in devotion, he comes to him
8. Y33.6.
with worship and praise.5 He seeks to approach
Mazda with songs of praise and invocation.6 Through
9. Y28.6.
righteousness of Asha and good deeds of Vohu
Manah, he says, he will come to Ahura Mazda
worshipping with words of praise.7 He is anxious to 10. Y33.7.
behold his maker and to hold converse with him.8 He
implores Ahura Mazda to come to him through Vohu 11. Y28.3.
Manah.9 In another place he beseeches Ahura Mazda
12. Y28.5.
to come in his person through Asha and Vohu
10
Marrah. He is eager to win Ahura Mazda, Vohu
13. Y28.3.
Manah and Asha for himself.11 He desires to know
when being enlightened he will See Ahura Mazda,
Asha, Vohu Manah, Sraosha, and the throne of Ahura 14. Y33.11.
Mazda.12 He appeals to Ahura Mazda, Asha,
Khshathra, and Armaiti to come to him;13 to hearken 15. Y28.9.

unto him and have mercy upon him.14 The [71]
16. Y34.2; Y45.8;
faithful long to dedicate their songs of praise to
Mazda, Asha, and Vahishta Manah and say that they Y49.10.
will never incur their provocation.15 The songs of
praise and homage, the prayers and good deeds of
the righteous are stored in Garo Demana
[Garothman], the Abode of Song.16
Bountiful Ahura Mazda is munificent in showering his
17. 51.18.
gifts upon mankind and he knows what is best to
give. Zarathushtra implores him to give what pleases
18. Y43.13.
him.17 He prays for long life;18 that he may be
enabled to perform the good deeds of the Holy Spirit
19. Y28.1.
through righteousness.19 He asks him to apportion all
good things of life and further the life of the body
20. Y33.10.
through Vohu Manah and Khshathra according to
his will20 Vigour and endurance are the essential
21. Y43.1.
qualities that enable man to fight wickedness and
cling to righteousness and Zarathushtra prays for
22. Y45.10; Y51.7.
them.21 These blessings are the earthly counterparts
of weal and immortality, the heavenly boons
23. Y51.7.
represented by Haurvatat and Ameretat,22 and
Zarathushtra asks Ahura Mazda to bestow them upon
24. Y51.2.
him through Vohu Manah according to his
commandments.23 He prays for the possession of
25. Y43.1.
spiritual riches of Ahura Mazda,24 the riches that
form part of the life of Vohu Manah.25 He beseeches
26. Y28.3.
Ahura Mazda to come unto him for help in his need
with Vohu Manah, Asha, Khshathra, and Armaiti.26
27. Y51.2.
He asks Ahura Mazda to shower his blessings upon
the man who approaches him with invocation.27 He
28. Y51.21.
prays for that divine blessing, the power of Ahura
Mazda which he gives through Vohu Manah unto
29. Y51.20.
the holy man who furthers righteousness through
words and deeds tinged with religious wisdom.28 He
30. Y53.1.
invokes upon all the blessings of Ahura Mazda, Vohu

Manah, Asha, and Armaiti, who are all of one will.29
His best prayer is heard and his ardent wish is
fulfilled that those who once opposed his teachings
have now come over to the faith to embrace the
words and deeds of his religion and Ahura Mazda has
extended to him the life of felicity now and for
ever.30
Zarathushtra faces bitter opposition from those who
have played upon the credulity of the ignorant and
the superstitious [72] and have prospered thereby.
He invokes Ahura Mazda for the frustration of their
mischievous machinations. Even prophets are moved
with indignation and righteous wrath against evilminded persons who lead mankind to destruction.
Jesus, the embodiment of gentleness, denounces the
Scribes and Pharisees with prophetic rage as fools
and hypocrites, serpents and vipers; he overthrows
the tables of money-changers, and casts them out of
the temple with a whip of small cords. Zarathushtra
exhorts those who seek Vohu Manah's blessings to
put down violence and cruelty.31 He implores Armaiti
not to let evil rulers govern the land.32 Bendva is the
powerful foe who thwarts Zarathushtra's work of
winning over men and women to righteousness, and
he prays unto Ahura Mazda for his downfall.33 He
calls such persons liars, deceivers, and wicked.34
The Manthras. The prophetic word of great moral
significance is called Manthra, corresponding to the
Vedic Mantra. Both in Iran and India they turn into
spells of magical charms. Ahura Mazda has, in one
will with Asha, made them.35 Zarathushtra prays that
he and Vishtaspa may successfully proclaim them.36
Whoso explains these sacred formulas unto the wise
reaps joy.37 Zarathushtra is the friend of one who

31. Y48.7.
32. Y48.5.
33. Y49.1.
34. Y49.2; 53.8.

35. Y29.7.
36. Y28.7.
37. Y51.8.
38. Y50.6.

chants them with homage;38 and invokes Ahura
39. Y50.5.
Mazda to help him through Asha.39 He rouses all
those that recite them to religious life.40 He gains the 40. Y43.14.
best reward wbo proclaims the true words of
righteousness, weal, and immortality.41 He who
41. Y31.6.
follows righteousness under the inspiration of the
Manthras gains weal and immortality.42 Those who 42. Y44.17.
do not base their conduct upon these salutary words
as the prophet himself thinks and does, will be in the 43. Y45.3.
woe in the end.43 Grehma the opponent of the faith
and his wicked followers who harass the messenger of 44. Y32.13.
Ahura Mazda's holy words will go to the abode of
the Worst Thought.44 Zarathushtra seeks to know
45. Y44.14.
how will he rout wickedness by the holy words of
Mazda's ordinance.45 With these sacred formulas on 46. Y28.5.
their tongues, he says, he and his disciples will
convert the wicked to their Lord.46 The words of the 47. Y31.18.
wicked are also called Manthras, and the prophet
exhorts his hearers not to listen to [73] them, because
they bring destruction and death to the settlements
of the faithful.47
Rituals and sacrifices. Gods required to be
propitiated that they might extend their favour to
men. When men began to lead settled agricultural
life, they began to offer ihe first fruits of the harvest
and produce of the cattle as thanksgiving offerings to
them. With growing prosperity they prepared rich
repasts of sumptuous food and wine and invoked
them to alight on the hallowed place where
ceremonial rites were performed, or kindled fire to
despatch the sacrifices to heaven on its flaming
tongues. Thus were the gods as well as the ancestral
dead treated at sacrificial repasts everywhere. The
Indo-Iranians were not behind other peoples and
their sacrificial offerings consisted of milk and melted

butter, grain and vegetables, flesh of goats and sheep,
bulls and horses, and the exhilarating Soma-Haoma
beverage. Elaborate rituals and sacrifices offered to
obtain coveted boons, to gain the remission of sins,
and to stave off the terrors of hell. The consecrated
food was partaken of by the sacrificers to reap the
merit. The altars were reeking with the blood of
animals that were sacrificed to innumerable gods.
Zarathushtra does away with such sacrifices and
purifies rituals.
Ritual is not religion; but it is a powerful aid to
religious life. It feeds the emotional nature of man
which plays the most prominent part in religious life.
It inspires devotional fervour and purity of thoughts.
Zarathushtra presumably utilized this formal side of
religion to stimulate religious emotion and inspire
righteous conduct. Tradition ascribes the division of
society into priests, warriors, husbandmen, and
artisans to the initiative of King Yima [=Jamshed] of
ihe Golden Age of Iran. Zarathushtra does not
recognize this fourfold professional order of society
in the Gathas. He does not mention âthravan, 'the
protector of fire' or priest. The Later Avesta speaks of
the sacerdotal class by the title of âthravan. The
Pahlavi texts continue to employ this priestly
designation, and in addition speak of it as magopat, or
magpat, corresponding to the Greek form Magi or
Magus. Zarathushtra uses the forms derived from
maga, 'great,' but it cannot be said that he uses them
in reference to the priestly class. A threefold division
of society appears in the Gathas, and Zarathushtra
gives each one altogether different names. They are
[74] called xvaetu, airyaman, and verezena, probably
indicating his immediate disciples, the nobility, and
the working classes respectively.48

48. Y32.1; 33.3, 4;
46.1; cf. [James Hope]
Moulton, Early
Zoroastrianism,
[London: 1913,] p.
355 n. 2.

The Later Avestan texts speak of distinct
functionaries who officiated at the sacrificial
ceremonies. The head of this group is zaotar,
corresponding to Skt. hotar, 'the sacrificer.'
Zarathushtra speaks of himself as a zaotar in one
passage though with an ethical implication only. As a
49. Y33.6.
zaotar, he seeks the vision of Ahura Mazda and longs
to hold communion with him.49 The food offered as a
50. Y34.3.
ceremonial offering is known in the Avestan texts as
myazda, and Zarathushtra says that the faithful will
51. Y33.8.
offer myazda with homage unto Ahura Mazda and
Asha.50 He alludes once to draonah [=dron], 'the
sacred cake,' which forms an indispensable article of
offering in the later period. He speaks of it probably
in the sense of the ambrosia and asks Haurvatat and
Ameretat to confer it upon him for ever.51

>
[75]
CHAPTER IX
LIFE IS A BLESSING
The joy of living. Zarathushtra gives a joyful
orientation to bodily life. He preaches a robust faith
in living. The world may not come up to the
individual's expectations, yet he has to live in such a
wise as to get maximum good out of life. Man finds
that sometimes life glides peacefully like the moon
that sails across the heavens; on other occasions it
runs a rough and ruffled course. Zarathushtra teaches
man to adjust himself to the diverse ways of life. Man
has to accept life on its own terms, take it as he finds

it, make as much of it as he can, rejoice in it, and
glory in it. He has to be a radiating centre of cheer
and happiness to all with whom he comes in contact.
It is the duty of every one to be the bearer of joy and
light in gloomy and dark homes.
Man has an unquenchable thirst for joy, pleasure, and
happiness. He longs for them in this world as he
prays that he should get them in the next. In this
world of joy and sorrow, Providence has provided
joy in abundance for men and women in all stages of
their lives to make their lives livable.
The rich and poor, high and low alike can feast their
eyes on the wealth of natural beauty and the marvels
of natural phenomena. It is superstition that converts
lovable nature into a haunt of dreadful demons and
ghosts, goblins and witches. Everything in nature
wears a cheerful outlook and a bright hue. New life is
blossoming all around and nature throbs with joy.
The dawn has her charms reserved for those who rise
early. The poor are astir at dawn and begin their day
by enjoying the marvellous beauties of nature. They
witness the rays of the rising sun driving away the
morning mists. They have no diamonds to decorate
their bodies, but there are no diamonds to compare
with the sparkling beads of dew that they see on the
leaves of the trees around them, when the virgin rays
of the rising sun throw their lustre upon these. The
poorest can inhale [76] in deep draughts the fresh
breeze coming from fields which are being mown,
from rich foliage and thick woods, or the sweet
perfume of roses and jasmine wafted by the wind, or
taste the sweet smell of the earth when it has been
drenched by seasonal rain. It is a great joy to sit or lie
under the shade of trees with their leafy branches
gently swaying to and fro to refresh us with cool

breeze fanning our faces, or to sit in a rose bower
redolent of sweet perfume, or to sprawl or roll about
or walk barefooted on the grass, or to romp in the
gardens, or to run wild in the fields and woods, or to
rest our eyes on the tender green of the grassy lawns
stretched before us. Often do we long for calm and it
gives us soothing calm to sit in the fields with
nothing but the rustle of dry leaves to break the
stillness. It thrills us with joy to hear the birds lilting
and carolling their sweet music. The nightingale's
melodious song, the cooing of the dove restlessly
moving its beautiful neck, the chirping and warbling
of birds, the buzzing of insects, and the sound of the
wind singing through the woods have a pleasing
effect on our minds. It is as pleasant to watch the
waters of a pond ruffled by the wind, or the eddies of
a lake, or the slender jets of the water of the fountain,
or the sunbeams dancing on the water, as to watch
the roaring waves rolling up with weakening ripples
and softly breaking at our feet. It is pleasing to hear
the noise of the heavy rain spattering against the
window panes and the puddles in the street, or to see
the snow falling in fleecy flakes. It cheers us to see
the crimson glow at the sunset, the starlit firmament,
powerful wind driving the fleecy clouds before it, the
gambolling of soft, white cloudlets and their chasing
one another like kittens, the bashful endeavour of the
moon to peep from between the clouds, or the moon
bravely fighting her way out from the heavy dark
clouds interrupting her course and shrouding her in
darkness, or the gorgeous pageant of the moon
sailing the sky on a clear night in her majestic glory
attended by her myriad sparkling handmaids, or the
moon flooding the earth with her light and bathing
the trees in silver shine, or the glittering rays of the
moon drawing silvery lines on the waters. Nature

delights us in her multifarious phases. It gives us
untold joy and pleasure to be with her for our
company. Our hearts beat in unison with the mighty
heart of nature.
There is infinite joy in watching the play and
amusements of [77] children. There is pleasure in
watching games and sports played by others. There is
yet greater pleasure in our own singing, dancing,
walking, running, riding, driving, playing, roaming in
a forest buzzing with life or in the fields of waving
grass, skating, swimming, having a plunge in cool
surging waves of the ocean on a summer day or
rowing amid the rhythmic plash of the oars and a
variety of entertainments.
The enlightened find joy in rational pastimes. They
saunter in literary bypaths and find incalculable joy
in literature, art, music, and other occupations of the
mind. For them there is no delight to compare with
the intellectual delights. There is no joy greater than
that which one who is consumed with the desire to
add something to human knowledge or to further
human health and happiness experiences when,
deeply engrossed in inventing and discovering, after
concentrated observation and protracted
experimenting he hits upon a right solution of the
problem of his search. The products of such creative
minds in the fields of arts and sciences have made life
more livable. When we get wearied of our workaday
world, it is enlivening to court the company of
books. Our cares and sorrows are forgotten for a
time, and we get a soothing message to embolden us
to face life's problems. We greet thinkers and sages,
poets and writers, historians and travellers, the great
and the noble, the mighty and the heroic that have

lived in ages past. The fatigue of our minds leaves us,
the anguish of our hearts disappears, and we are
refreshed. Joy and hope prepare us for our duties of
life.
It is a boon to live, says Zarathushtra. He teaches
everyone to enliven his mind with sunny
cheerfulness, to be gay of heart and buoyant of spirit.
He exhorts him to say Yea to life with overflowing
enthusiasm and overplus joy.
Happiness unto him who gives happiness unto
others. Thus says Zarathushtra at the gray dawn of
history.1 The sublime precept is again and again
imparted to mankind in their days by Confucius,
Hillel, and Jesus and is contained in the Pentateuch
and the Book of Tobit. The noblest of mankind live
to make others happy. Kindly feelings for others
make them insensible to their own privations. They
impose privation upon themselves to save something
for the needy. They place service before self and
expose their lives and limbs to imminent peril [78] to
rescue others in danger. They think little of
1. Y43.1.
themselves and much of others, and wear out their
lives in the service of others. In all ages and places
there have been noble men and women who would
willingly sacrifice their lives a hundred times over for
some ideal, some noble cause. Men of generous
disposition have always laboured to bring sunshine in
the lives of their fellow-men. Such persons have been
eager to share their own happiness with their
neighbours. Life lived for others is life at its best.
When everybody will wish everybody well and when
everybody will endeavour to live for all and all will
labour to live for everybody, men and women will be
angels in flesh inhabiting the world. Service to

fellowmen is the best service to Mazda.
Vitality and endurance are priceless boons. The
body is the most marvellous apparatus prerequisite
for mental and spiritual activity. Zarathushtra is the
first to teach that the purity of the body leads to the
purity of the mind and the pure in mind become pure
in spirit. Life is struggle and a healthy, sound and
strong body is indispensable for combating physical,
social, and moral evil. Everyone has to gird up his
loins for the fray and with a sound and rigorous body
be quick in his gait for the arduous duty not to do
less than his best in life. It is robust health that
creates bodily vigour and vitality. Zarathushtra lays
constant emphasis on a sound and agile body, for it is
indispensable for all activities of mind and spirit. The
spirit may be daring and eager to fight the battles of
life, but it cannot fulfil the mission of its life if it is
enshrouded in a weak body. Zarathushtra prays for
his followers to be brimful of vitality and energy
which may give them success in all their physical,
mental, and spiritual efforts to uplift humanity.
Vitality and endurance, or utayûitî and tevishî, are the
most incomparable earthly boons given by Haurvatat
and Ameretat. These superb qualities of the body
make for physical exuberance which results in the
strenuous, untiring, zealous activity on the part of
man. Man of overflowing vitality, unfailing
endurance, abnormal energy, undaunted courage,
restless activity, whose life is bubbling over with
youthful exuberance, who is intoxicated by the
exhilarating enthusiasm, laughs in the face of
obstacles and hardships, and looks death defiantly in
the face, lives a whole life in the short span of time
and changes history. Physical exuberance is a
stimulant to [79] mental and spiritual exuberance.

The harmonious adjustment creates zest for life, and
unbounded enthusiasm for ameliorative work. The
ordinary man in his undertakings and the patriot who
changes the destiny of his country and the prophet
who revolutionizes man's social and moral life, all
work with diverse enthusiasms created by the bodily,
mental, and spiritual exuberance.
Prayer for earthly blessings. Zarathushtra asks
Mazda to give him and his followers long-enduring
joy that he may be able to withstand opposition.2
Zarathushtra prays that the faithful be given the
reward of joyful and happy life.3 Ahura Mazda has
ordained that the good shall have happy homes in
which joy abounds.4 He is invoked to give, according
to his will, such good abodes with all pleasures of life
that were and are and will be.5 The faithful long for
such good abodes rich in pastures.6 Armairi, as the
genius of the earth, gives happy dwellings unto the
righteous.7 Those that are devoted to Vohu Manah
are blessed plenty and prosperity.8 The Daevas
defraud mankind of happy life upon earth.9

2. Y28.6.
3. Y28.2.
4. Y29.10.
5. Y33.10.
6. Y48.11.
7. Y48.6.
8. Y49.5.
9. Y32.5.

Ahura Mazda and his heavenly associates advance the
10. Y28.9.
desires of the good for the blessings of life.10
Zarathushtra invokes for the realization of the desires
that he and Vishtaspa entertain.11 Zarathushtra asks 11. Y28.7.
Ahura Mazda to fulfil the desires of those who are
worthy in his eyes for their righteousness and for
12. Y28.10.
12
good thoughts.
Mazda is implored to grant vitality and endurance
which are the earthly gifts of Haurvatat and
Ameretat.13 Armaiti confers these boons upon the
inmates of happy homes.14 Zarathushtra prays for
long life.15 Mazda is besought to bestow happiness

13. Y43.1; 45.10; 51.7.
14. Y48.6.
15. Y33.5.

and joy for all the days of a long life upon those who
pray for them.16 The happiness and blessings of life
come unto those that are righteous.17 The devout
pray for the riches of Good Mind through
Righteousness that may bring unto them joy of [80]
long life.18 Vohu Manah is invoked to give reward to
men according to their deeds.19 Ahura Mazda is
implored to grant vitality through Armaiti and
through the Holiest Spirit, mighty power through
Asha, and supremacy through Vohu Manah.20

16. Y43.2; 50.5.
17. Y51.8, 9, 20.
18. Y28.7, 8; Y43.12.
19. Y43.16.
20. Y33.12.

[81]
CHAPTER X
EVIL
The problem of evil. The origin of evil has been the
deepest problem of life.1 It confronts every human
being in one form or other. If there is one question
which has eluded all investigations of the keenest
intellects of all lands and all times; if there is one
problem which has called forth volumes of writings
from the profoundest of thinkers; if there is one
riddle that has baffled all attempts of the sages at
solving it; if there is one problem on which the last
word yet remains to be said, despite the world's
voluminous literature of some ten and twenty
centuries -- it is the problem of the existence of evil.
It makes a world of difference whether one looks on
life with a healthy mind and a cheerful spirit, or with
a morbid mind and a sick spirit, or with an arrogant
mind and a defiant spirit. The philosophies of life
vary greatly from optimism or pessimism to cynicism
or scepticism, according to the various casts of the
temperaments of their founders. Life has been a
blessing to some, but a curse to others. Some have

1. Some material in
this chapter is inserted
here from my Our
Perfecting World, New
York, 1930.

sought satisfaction by giving up the world of activity
with its joys and sorrows, others have tried to escape
the temptations and vices of the world by leading a
life of self-renunciation. To others still, freedom from
existente has seemed the only salvation.
The existence of evil is a stubborn fact of life. The
creation has not only a bright but also a dark side,
and the latter is to be accounted for. All is not well
with the universe. There is something that savours of
bad. The optimist who says that all is right with the
world is as much at fault as the pessimist who says
that all is wrong. It is not good to dilate upon
wrongs, real and imaginary, and pine away under
melancholy and gloom; it is wrong to groan and
worry over the darkness of the night, oblivious of the
light of the day; but it is equally wrong to dismiss
[82] this great question in a rough-and-ready way by
denying outright the existence of evil. We cannot
dismiss this eternal problem with a shrug of the
shoulder. Evil is far too potent a factor in human life
to permit us to turn a blind eye to it. It is too real to
be ignored and sophistically explained away.
Man finds that he lives in a hostile world. The
elements and animals and his fellowmen combine to
make war upon him. Great is the wrath of the
elements. Nature is beautiful and kindly, benevolent
and bountiful, wise and frugal, cheering and
comforting, ennobling and inspiring. But Providence
governs the universe by the law of contraries. In her
molevolent mood, nature is a callous and capricious
and frightful monster, raging and thundering, wasting
and withering, scorching and burning, drowning and
burying, devastating and destroying, devouring and
killing. Her catastrophes and cataclysms work havoc

upon earth. Her magic wand spells destruction and
death all around. With appalling suddenness, in one
terrific moment, she razes to the ground marvels of
man, raised by his toil and industry of years. Her
burning mountains, in their frightful freaks, rain
brimstone and fire upon fertile fields, convert
prosperous towns in one raging sea of flame, emit
molten metals, and, let loose hell on earth. Her
terrific quakes bring havoc upon villages and towns,
overwhelm sleeping humanity reposing in its implicit
confidence in the gentle mother earth, rudely wake
men, women, and children, and mercilessly drive
them headlong, demented and delirious, in futile
search of shelter and safety and bury their unwary
victims deep under the debris. Her furious hurricanes
blow about the weeping weaklings of the human and
animal world like autumn leaves and bury them alive
in the sandy solitudes of the desert. The unbridled
gushing waters of her inundations carry all life and
property before them. Her famines and droughts kill
vegetation and decimate animals and human beings.
Her giant trees strangle and deal out death to small
trees growing about them in the forests. Wild
creepers entwine themselves like serpents round trees
and choke their lives out. Countless millions of
insects and ants gnaw trees down to dust and death,
ravage the crops, and kill live stock. A reign of
struggle to the death is witnessed in the animal
world. The strong live and thrive by devouring the
weak in the forests. Millions of animals and birds and
fishes are born to be so many morsels to the stronger
of their [83] species. She breeds plagues and
pestilences and looses death to hold its carnival.
Leprosy distorts the countenances of hundreds of
thousands of men and women, renders loathsome
their touch, and encrusts their bodies with plague

spots of disease more horrible than death.
The greater enemy of men than elements and
animals, however, is man himself. The human
scourges of God, like Attila or Jenghis Khan or
Nadirshah or Tamerlane, sweep over populated areas
like blighting winds and leave an appalling wake of
desolation and death. Peoples give distressing
exhibition of human bestiality when they go to war
with one another. Man's baseness augments a
thousandfold the beastliness of nature. His
inhumanity to man, nurtured upon his falsehood and
inequity, arrogance and avarice, wrath and jealousy,
envy and hatred, cunning and intrigue, vindictiveness
and cruelty, malice and back-biting, selfishness and
meanness, and vice and wickedness create human
misery worse than the worst done by the lifeless and
living creation whose lord he claims to be. When the
brute in him rears his head and acts through him, he
becomes worse than the wildest beast of the jungle.
Zarathushtra stigmatizes evil as evil. The existence
of so much evil in the world lies heavy on the heart
of man. Evil is a challenge, and Zarathushtra accepts
it. He does not palliate evil. It is not, he teaches, the
passive negation of good. It is the active enemy of
good. It is not complementary to good, nor is it good
in the making. It is not evil only in name. Evil is just
evil, nothing more nor less. It is the fundamental fact
of life, and haunts us like our shadows which we
cannot evade. Illusion does not cause evil; it exists in
the realm of reality. It is the most disagreeable fact in
Ahura Mazda's universe, and the prophet of Iran
looks it in the face. It is futile to speak of things as
better than they actually are. Bad things of life do not
lose their badness by giving them good names. It is

wrong to make-believe that evil does not exist,
though it does exist as truly as man exists. The world
is not all good; it is not all bad either. Neither is all
right with the world, nor is all bad with it.
Life is co-operation with good and conflict with
evil. Good and evil are co-existing polarities. Man
can think of things only in terms of their opposites.
Light is light because of darkness. Health is a coveted
boon, as its loss heralds sickness. Life is [84] valued as
Ahura Mazda's most incomparable gift, as lurking
death threatens its extinction. Happiness is pleasant,
for misery is unbearable. Riches rise in worth owing
to the dread of poverty. Joy is gratifying, for sorrow
aims at killing it. Virtue is the health of the spirit, for
vice is its disease. Righteousness is the life of the
spirit, for wickedness spells its death.
There can be no compromise between good and evil.
Incessant warfare is raging between good and evil.
Man's duty is to commend good and co-operate with
it; to condemn evil and enter into conflict with it.
"Resist Evil" is the clarion call of Zarathushtra to
humanity. Evil is equally the enemy of Ahura Mazda
and man, and man is created a comrade in arms to
resist it in all its manifestations. It is his birthright to
fight evil. He shares Ahura Mazda's work of mending
evil. The world is a battlefield and man is a soldier in
the eternal struggle. The soldier's duty is to stand
firm at his post and fight even to the death. If he
holds overtures with the enemy, or succumbs to his
wiles, he is a rebel; if he evades fight, or ignores it, or
turns his back upon the enemy, he is a coward,
dishonouring his manhood.
Belief in the existence of evil gives force to man's

feelings of repugnance to evil. He can squarely meet
the enemy of Ahura Mazda and man on the field, and
give him battle, if his reality is fully understood. Evil
is fought the harder, not by loving good the more,
but by hating evil. Love of good and working for
good breed only passive dislike for evil. Hatred of
evil alone sets the soul on fire to fight it with zest and
zeal. Evil cannot be hated with an all-consuming
hatred, if it is masked in the garments of good. To be
hated from the depth of the heart, and with the
fullest force of one's being, evil should be exposed in
its innate ugliness, its diabolic nature. Evil is
aggressive. Man must resist and conquer it, or submit
and court defeat.
Zoroastrianism is essentially militant. It stirs human
hearts to repugnance towards evil; it spurs man to
fight it with all his being, body, mind, and spirit. Not
to resist evil with offensive and defensive warfare
against it is either to be callous or cowardly, or both
in one's person; it is to fail in one's duty to mankind
and be false to the redemptive task assigned by Ahura
Mazda to man. Evil is the common enemy of Ahura
Mazda and man, and man is engaged in fighting as an
ally of the [85] godhead. In his fight against evil, he
is a co-worker and a fellow-combatant with Ahura
Mazda. Men of all times and all places have to fight
individually and collectively for 1he mighty cause.
Man has to fight the forces of evil to his last breath.
His life is one of a continued crusade against the
powers of wickedness. He has to adjust social
wrongs, regenerate society, and redeem the world of
humanity.
Man's duty to resist evil in his own nature. Man was
2. Y45.2.
animal but yesterday. Today he is man, though not

devoid of animal traits. His destiny is to be angel, and
tomorrow he shall be that also. Everyone has in his or
her power to be a saint. But the way to attain
sainthood and divinity is distant and beset with
countless difficulties. Every step in advance is a
struggle. The animal in man is obdurate and
persistent, cunning and resourceful. To escape from
his grip, to destroy his power, to eliminate him, man
has to fight a hundred battles. Man's inner life is a
perpetual warfare between animal and human within
his breast. A violent struggle is going on in every
human heart between the higher impulses to
renounce animal appetites, and the lower instincts to
satisfy them. Man is a divided self, divided mind,
divided will, and feels within him the conflict of two
opposing natures. The one half of man's being is
always at war with his other half. When the Good
Spirit first met the Evil Spirit, he said that he was
opposed to him in his thoughts and words and deeds
and faith and conscience and soul and every thing.2
The same comp1ete polarity obtains between the
higher self and the lower self in man. The one stands
for truth, virtue, and righteousness, the other
represents falsehood, vice, and wickedness. Though
inhabitants of the same tenement, they are poles
apart in their thoughts, words, deeds, feelings, and
aspirations. What is light to one is darkness to the
other, and what is nourishment to the one is poison
to the other. When the animal in man gets the better
of the human, it makes for his imperfection, it is his
curse, his enemy, his evil. Evil thoughts and dark
passions are its emissaries. They are to be combated
and conquered, if man desires to fulfil his destiny.
The storm of evil that arises within man is no less
violent than any which he encounters in the outer
world. Resistance to evil in the one is as instinctive as

it is in the other. This resistance is conducive to [86]
higher life. It breeds in man the qualities of strenuous
effort, toil, courage, strength, and sacrifice.
Courageous fight to vanquish evil builds character.
Facing aggressive evil with fortitude, fighting
temptations, and overcoming evil is progressive
ascent towards individual perfection.
Man's duty to resist evil in society. As it is with the
individual so it is with society. Social life opens with
animal instincts and evolves toward human traits.
Every man is an ally of every other man against the
common enemy, evil. When they play human they
co-operate with their comrades in the task ordained
for them by Ahura Mazda. In their forgetful
moments, when they throw down their human
vesture and lapse into their animal state, they miss
their mark. Instead of fighting the enemy of man,
they fight men, and tear them with mad fury. Every
man's hand, then, is against every man individually,
as every nation's hand is against every nation
collectively. Rather than follow the demands of the
moral world, to wage war with evil, they continue the
practice of the physical world, the war of the strong
against the weak. At all times they fight beyond their
homeland, sometimes they fight in their homes.
Dogs living in the same yard are friends all day, but
turn into foes at any hour. So are men, friendly and
fondling in their human nature, but snarling at each
other, like dogs, when the animal in them emerges on
the surface. Society has always had its parasites, who
live on theft and plunder, rapine and bloodshed. So
will it be until that time, in distant ages to come,
when society, by human effort for betterment,
eventually reaches perfection. The animal in man will
grow weak with time, and will be subdued. As society

progresses in evolution, this baser element in man
will be disabled by degrees. In perfect society it will
be eliminated.
But society is yet imperfect in all phases of its life. It
has its stray dogs and pouncing wolves and cunning
serpents. They are menaces to its well-being, and
vigorous resistance to their vicious propensities and
evil doings is indispensable for the very life of
society. In primitive society the work of redressing
wrongs remains in the hands of aggrieved individuals,
and as individuals are actuated by vengeance, hatred
is met by hatred, blood is avenged by blood, and evil
is repaid by evil. In organized society the right of
redressing wrongs is taken from the individual.
Society interferes, and in its authoritative position
[87] as State, undertakes to dispense justice to
warring factions. Justice ceases to be vengeance, but
cannot dispense with the punishing rod. Society
cannot exist without laws, and all legislation implies
enforcement of laws by punishing their infringement.
To punish, however, is to use force tor the resistance
of evil. An imperfect society in an imperfect world
cannot exist without its courts and constabularies, its
prisons and scaffolds. The State as police cannot do
its duty without resort to physical force. If the
guardians of society were to don ash-coloured robes,
and retreat before the forces of evil, or make
themselves known as non-resistants to evil,
unprotected society would soon welter in crime and
bloodshed. Militant evil, with no deterrent
combatants in the field, would throttle passive good
to death.
Persuasion and force are two chief factors
indispensable in human affairs. Individuals, as well as

society, can endure wrong patiently and try to
reclaim the wrong-doer by good counsel and
admonition. But when persuasion fails in its purpose,
and wicked people become more desperate in
inflicting injury, endurance on the part of the
recipient of injury ceases to be virtue. It encourages
evil, exposes society to danger, and does harm even
to the perpetrator of crime by allowing him without
restraint to sink deeper in guilt. The human in man is
amenable to persuasion, but his animal nature must
be subdued by force. Society requires the coercion of
the State, because it is imperfect. To those members
of the State who are walking on the path of
perfection or who are striving to come nearer to
perfection, coercive laws of the State do not apply.
As society evolves towards perfection, persuasive
power will prove an increasingly effective urge to
good behaviour, and force will gradually recede into
the background. In the perfect society to come, force
will have no place.
To be good and eschew evil are passive virtues; to
further good and to fight evil are active virtues.
Personal salvation is the basic principle, the motive
power that inspires all religious life. Zarathushtra
insists that every man's duty is to seek salvation of all
mankind. To secure individual salvation and leave
others to their fate, without working and struggling
for their salvation, is to fail in one's duty towards his
fellow-men. To be good, but not to make others
good; not to be evil, yet not to resist evil caused by
others, are merely negative virtues. Just as [88] the
individual's duty ends not in practising passive virtues
which tend to make him good, but in making others
good, so also he must not rest when he has eradicated
his evil thoughts, bridled his passions, and overcome

the evil that lurks in his inward nature, but he has
further to reclaim others who have embraced evil. It
is not only passive resistance that he has to offer to
evil, but, adopting an aggressive attitude towards evil
of all kinds, he has to combat and rout it. It is not
enough that he should himself eschew evil; he must
combat evil in others. He cannot remain a passive
spectator while his neighbour is suffering. He is not
to be a passive onlooker of, or to connive at some
wrong on the ground that he is not the originator of
it. The fact that something evil and imperfect exists
around him, no matter by whom caused, is a
sufficient reason why he should rush into the fray and
do his share to mitigate and remove it. Nay, he has
even to hunt out the hydra of wrong and strike at its
many heads, so that the world of goodness may not
suffer.
The prophet of Iran warns man that happiness is not
the criterion of the value of human life, pleasure is
not the standard; but duty in its two-fold aspect, that
is, of working for righteousness and fighting against
wickedness, is the guiding principle of life. Incessant
work for the Kingdom of Righteousness deepens
man's life; uncompromising war against the Kingdom
of Wickedness strengthens it. This two-fold activity
makes life complete. To further righteousness is only
half the duty; to combat wickedness is the other half.
Both are indispensable to realize the Zoroastrian.
ideal of righteousness.
Everyone can contribute his or her mite, in the
manifold walks of life, to the grand end of bringing
about the final victory of good and the utter defeat of
evil. The poorest man, who cheerfully fulfils his
obligations of father and husband, brother and son,

who struggles with poverty, yet loves independence
and honour, who extends not his hand for alms, but
lives on the slender earnings of his honest toil, who
rears his children into good men and women does his
duty by goodness, and does it well. The man who has
energy and time, and employs both of these in social
service of any kind, who organizes philanthropic
work, preparing ameliorative schemes and who
spends his bodily vigour and leisure hours for the
betterment of bumanity, succours goodness. The rich
man, who gives away his wealth in the [89] name of
Ahura Mazda to alleviate the sufferings of the needy,
feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, heals the sick,
builds homes for the homeless; promotes goodness.
The man of learning and wisdom, who enlightens
and inspires, ennobles and uplifts mankind, furthers
goodness. The man of adventurous spirit who
reclaims arid wastes, fertilizes barren lands, clears the
forests of wild beasts; or the man of talents, who
discovers an antidote to some disease, a preventive to
epidemics and plagues, extirpates germs and bacteria,
combats heroically physical evil. One who struggles
hard for the elimination of the darkness of the mind,
who crusades against superstition and bigotry, is
combating mental evil. The man who struggles with
the forces of corruption and injustice, who fights for
the redress of wrongs, who blunts the edge of the
tyrant's sword, is routing the forces of social evil. A
righteous person who wages a relentless war against
immorality, who pares the wings of vice and cripples
crime, is a hero of the war against moral evil.
ANGRA MAINYU
The Evil Spirit and his characteristics. Just as man,
in his religious evolution, comes to the belief in the
existence of kindly invisible beings who protect and

nourish and help him, so he discovers that there are
hostile powers who wish him evil. Such demons are
presided over by powerful chiefs who rule over the
world of darkness and evil. They have weak
personalities as incarnating evil, but each one is Satan
in the making. Set was in conflict with Horus in
Egypt, as Tiamat was with Marduk in Babylonia, and
Vritra with Indra among the Indo-Iranians.
The Evil Spirit who disputes the sovereignty over
human hearts in Iran with the Holy Spirit, is not
3. Y45.2.
given a proper name in the Gathas. Of the two
primeval Spirits, the one who chose evil as his sphere 4. Y44.12.
of activity is given the epithet angra, meaning enemy
or evil. Angra Mainyu thus means the Enemy or the 5. Y43.15; 44.12;
Evil Spirit. This attribute is applied once directly to 48.10.
the Evil Spirit.3 In another place it is said why is a bad
(angra) man not like unto Angra, 'The Evil One,'
6. Y30.3.
referring evidently to Angra Mainyu, or the Evil
7. Y32.5.
Spirit.4 The term angra is thus used more [90] than
once in the ordinary meaning 'evil' as a designation
of wicked men.5 He is given the epithet aka, 'bad.'6 In 8. Y30.5. [dregvant
one place he is given the name Aka Mainyu, 'the Bad literally means
Spirit.'7 Yet in another instance he is termed dregvant, 'possessing druj'. -JHP]
or the Wicked One.8
In his thoughts, words, deeds, faith, conscience, soul,
and everything else, he stands at the opposite pole to
the Good Spirit.9 He is himself evil in thought, word
and deed,10 and chose to do worst things.11 When he
first manifested himself he created non-life in
opposition to the action of the Good Spirit who
created life.12 He denounces the providence of Ahura
Mazda.13

9. Y45.2.
10. Y30.3.
11. Y30.5.
12. Y30.4.
13. Y44.12.

The Evil Spirit lures men by his mischievous
machinations to the path of wickedness, and lulls
their spiritual senses to repose. He is the inveterate
foe of humanity. Man, we may infer from the tone of
the Gathas, should avoid him as he would a
pestilence. Fortunate is he who successfully bridles
the tumult of the Evil Spirit and breaks the heavy
chains that fetter his spirit. But woe to him who
revolts from the Good Spirit, pays homage to the
author of evil, and lives in bondage to him. Such a
man is a moral pervert, a rebel, and suffers death in
the spirit. The normal state of man is to be always on
the side of the good, and by any act of going over to
the realm of evil he creates for himself an unnatural
situation. His sacred duty is to espouse the cause of
the Good Spirit.
DAEVAS
14. Y32.3.
The infernal crew. The diabolic spirits who have
entered into a compact with Angra Mainyu to mar
the good creation of Ahura Mazda are the Daevas, or 15. Y32.5.
demons. They are the offspring of the Evil Mind and
spread their mischief over all seven zones.14 The Evil 16. Y44.20.
Spirit has taught them to mislead men through evil
17. Y29.4.
thought, evil word, and evil deed.15 The Daevas
instigate the enemies of settled life to give the cattle
to violence.16 Mazda best remembers the misdeeds of 18. Y30.6.
these recreants and he judges [91] accordingly.17
When the two primal spirits of good and evil came 19. Y32.4.
together at the beginning of creation the demons
20. Y34.5.
chose evil and rushed with one accord to bring
18
destruction to mankind. The wicked are the beloved
of the demons, for they are the ones that renounce 21. Y45.11.
the Good Mind and revolt from the wisdom of Ahura
22. Y48.1.
Mazda and Righteousness.19 The demons should

therefore be abjured,20 and the Saviour Saoshyant will
be the friend, brother, and father of those who hate
them.21 The Daevas will receive their due at the final
Dispensation when Righteousness will smite
Wickedness.22
As Ahura Mazda holds his council of celestial beings,
so Angra Mainyu maintains in his infernal court a
retinue of male and female demons. In opposition to
every archangel and angel, the younger literature sets
up a corresponding fiend. These form exact
counterparts of the powers of goodness, and always
act in direct opposition to them. We do not find the
symmetry of diametric opposites between these rival
forces carried out to completion in the extant Gathic
literature. The names of not all the corresponding
demons, who are the opponents of Mazda's
ministering angels, are found. The rivals of Vohu
23. Y33.4.
Manah, Asha, and Sraosha are mentioned by names,
as Aka Manah, Druj, and Aeshma, but with the
exception of Druj, the adversary of Asha, the rest are
seen working only sporadically and not in systematic
antagonism to their corresponding rival good spirits.
Taromaiti, or heresy, the opponent of Armaiti, is
named but once,23 though the term does not occur in
this particular passage as a personified demon. Aka
Manah, Druj, and Aeshma are the only Daevas
expressly mentioned in the Gathas. We shall deal
with these separately.
AKA MANAH
The Evil Mind. Aka Manah is mentioned only three 24. Y32.3; Y33.4;
Y47.5.
times in the Gathas.24 Even in his name he is the
antithesis of his heavenly rival Vohu Manah, or Good
Mind. Like his celestial adversary, who is sometimes 25. Y30.6.

called Vahishta Manah, 'Best Mind,' this fiend is also 26. Y32.3.
styled Achishta Manah or 'Worst Mind.' The [92]
Daevas, it is said, chosc to embrace the Worst
27. Y33.4; Y47.5.
Mind.25 They are the progeny of Aka Manah.26
Zarathushtra undertakes by his prayer to drive out
28. Y32.13.
the demon of Evil Mind from before him, that is,
from the world of Righteousness.27 When man's mind
is not filled with the good thoughts of Vohu Manah,
it becomes an easy prey to the onslaughts of the evil
thoughts of Aka Manah. Whosoever is a victim to
Aka Manah finds his thoughts enslaved by him. As
heaven is associated with Vohu Manah, hell is
mentioned as the region of Aka Manah. The tyrant
Grehma and his wicked followers who destroy life,
we are told, will go to the Abode of the Worst
Mind.28
DRUJ
Her Kingdom of Wickedness. The Rig Veda speaks
of a minor demon Druh who with others of her class
stands for malice or hatred. The corresponding
Gathic term is Druj, 'falsehood or wickedness.' The
Daevas are generally malevolent male beings. Druj,
on the other hand, is a female fiend. The Gathas give
her greater prominence than to any other evil being.
As the rival of Asha, or Righteousness, Druj
personifies wickedness in every form and aspect. All
evil in the world is focused in her. Ever since the Evil
Spirit introduced evil in the world, the world of
humanity has been and will be, until the final
Renovation of the universe, divided into two distinct
parties. Those on the side of Ahura Mazda follow the
law of Righteousness, but those who have chosen to
live in error have embraced the law of Druj, or
Wickedness. The righteous form together the world

of righteousness, whereas the wicked ones are classed
as the members of the world of wickedness. The
sacred mission of Zarathushtra lies in the work of
converting these misguided men to righteousness and
in winning them over to the side of Ahura Mazda.
The adherents of Druj. The man who yields to the
29. Y29.2, 5; 30.11;
temptations of Druj is a dregvant, 'wicked one,' as
46.1, 4.
opposed to the ashavan, 'righteous one,' who follows
Asha.29 Angra Mainyu himself is called dregvant.30
30. Y30.5.
The wicked who are themselves [93] of evil faith seek
to mislead others.31 They defy the good admonitions
31. Y45.1.
of the Deity and are not willing to hear the good
counsel, the divine word of the Good Mind.
32. Y44.13.
Zarathushtra seeks means, therefore, to drive out
their wickedness.32 He exhorts his audience to listen
33. Y45.1.
attentively to his inspired teachings, so that the
teacher of evil may not thereafter injure them.33 The
34. Y31.2; 33.1.
prophet comes as the lord between the parties of the
righteous and the wicked and those whose good and
35. Y31.1.
evil deeds balance.34 He preaches to those who,
being led astray by the evil advice of Druj, smite the
36. Y47.5.
world of righteousness.35 The wicked are far from the
good-will of Ahura Mazda; their sinful deeds make
37. Y32.11.
them companions of Evil Mind.36 They strive to
estrange the righteous from the Best Mind,37 and
38. Y32.12.
from the best deeds.38 They strive to reduce all others
to their own class. They bring distress and death to
39. Y31.18.
the house, village, town, and country, through their
wicked spells.39 He who harasses the prophet is the
40. Y51.10.
child of Druj.40
Druj's followers are to be requited with evil in this
world. In his crusade against the Kingdom of
Wickedness, Zoroaster is unsparing and even
unforgiving. We do not see, in the words handed

down from his lips, the gentler side of virtue of
returning good for evjl. Here we have the ethics of
retaliation. Once the antithesis between the
Kingdom of Righteousness and Wickedness is
sharply defined, the latter is to be relentlessly
opposed. The two parties are on the war-path, and
strict discipline demands that the righteous man will
on no account wink at or palliate wickedness, and let
the evildoer go free without retribution. Wrong is to
be handled as wrong, and the man who does wrong is
to be met with his own weapons. Evil is to be
requited by evil and not by goodness. Indifference
and leniency threaten only to further the domain of
Wickedness. Consequently evil is to be relentlessly
put down.
Zarathushtra is the friend of the righteous, but a
veritable foe to the wicked.41 The wicked lords of the
land vehemently oppose his work;42 it is they who
hinder the righteous in the pursuit of goodness. He
who hurls these miscreants down from [94] power
clears the way for the good teachings.43 Succouring
the wicked is tantamount to practising wickedness. It
is expressly said that the one who is good to the
wicked is himself wicked.44 Those who with their
thoughts, words, and deeds bring punishment to the
wicked fulfil the desire of Mazda.45 No one,
therefore, should be the cause of rejoicing to the
wicked.46 Every one, on the contrary should always
practise goodness towards the righteous, but deal out
ill to the wicked.47 The man of truthful words should
not give chieftainship to the wicked.48
Druj's disciples fare no better in the next world.
Ahura Mazda reckons the followers of Druj as
wicked, and therefore retribution and misery await

41. Y43.8.
42. Y46.1.
43. Y46.4.
44. Y46.6.
45. Y33.2.
46. Y43.15.
47. Y47.4.
48. Y49.9.
49. Y43.4; Y45.7
50. Y31.14, 15; Y51.8,

their souls.49 Ahura Mazda gives happiness and joy
hereafter to the righteous, but on the wicked he
inflicts punishment and pain.50 The wicked,
according to the teachings of the Gathas, are led by
their conscience through their own deeds to the
Abode of Darkness.51 One of the names of the
inferno, as we shall see, is drujo demâna, 'Abode of
Druj.' There rush the wilfully blind and deaf52 thither
go to perdition the crew of the wicked.53
Final defeat of Druj. The logical sequence to the war
between the powers of righteousness and wickedness
in these sharply defined poles of existence is the
demanded ultimate victory of righteousness over
wickedness. This is the goal towards which the world
of humanity moves. When punishment will come to
the wicked and the divine kingdom descend upon
earth, Druj will fall forever into the hands of Asha.54
Hence Zarathushtra abjures Druj,55 and prays for
power that he and his followers may be able to smite
Druj.56 He asks Ahura Mazda how it will be possible
to deliver over Druj into the hands of Asha,57 and it
will eventually come to pass that the righteous will
rout the wicked.58 The tone of his divine inquiry
implies the answer that when humanity unanimously
adheres to Righteousness, Wickedness will ultimately
perish.59
[95]
AESHMA

9.
51. Y31.20.
52. Y46.11; Y51.14.
53. Y49.11.

54. Y30.8.
55. Y49.3.
56. Y31.4.
57. Y44.14.
58. Y48.2.
59. Y30.10.

60. Y29.1.
61. Y29.2.

The demon of wrath. The foe of Sraosha, who is
above all the genius of obedience and revelation, is 62. Y30.6.
Aeshma, or 'Wrath.' When Geush Urvan, or the
Spirit of animal life, complains of the disturbance and 63. Y48.12.
disorder, chaos and anarchy prevailing on the earth,

it speaks of Aeshma as the prime originator of these 64. Y48.7.
calamities.60 The Fashioner of the Cattle, thereupon,
consults Asha to find out a chieftain who. would
ultimately banish Aeshma from the creation.61
Furthermore in this connection, when the twain
spirits of good and evil first met together at the
beginning of the creation, the demons embraced evil
and rushed to the standard of Aeshma in order to
bring destruction to the life of man.62 Those who
with firmness control and repress this arch-fiend are
the saviours.63 Zarathushtra says that the faithful
follower of the good, who is striving to hold and
make his own the Good Mind through righteousness,
should in the first place put down Aeshma, the fiend
of fury.64
[96]
CHAPTER XI
LIFE AFTER DEATH
Death lives by feeding on life. Death is ever at man's
heels. It is closer to him than his shadow. Man has
always desired to gain immunity from death. It is
only when man is downcast and depressed that he
looks to death as deliverer and says that he would be
better dead than live and suffer. When life becomes
dreary and dark, death, assumes a bright hue and
promises the unfortunate ones to drown their
miseries in the darkness of the grave, and to give
thein rest which life has not given them. When life
takes its normal course, man blames God that he
should have permitted death to stalk the earth. Out
of compassion for mankind, it is said, the Babylonian
god Ea once endeavoured to secure immortality for it
but failed in his attempt. Both gods and men

considered the indefinite prolongation of life as the
supremest blesssing. But the gods zealously guarded
this much coveted boon and kept it as their exclusive
possession. They grew jealous and frustrated men's
attempt to win immortality, for men would be gods if
they got the priceless prize. The hero Gilgamesh
passionately longed for immortal life and went in
search of an escape from death. He was informed by
the shade of his heroic compatriot whom death had
taken away from him that death was the final fate of
man and he was indulging in futile hopes. Immortal
life was for gods only. Death was the lot of mankind
and even a hero like Gilgamesh with all his
marvellous achievements could not escape it. It was,
therefore, advisable for him to give up yearning for
what was unattainable and rather whole-heartedly
enjoy life as long as it lasted and death was yet far
off. He is advised by others to don fine raiment, to
anoint himself with oil, to fill his belly with fine food
and wine, to love the woman of his bosom and be
merry by day and by night, for death would put an
end to his life at any moment.
Death comes with stealthy steps. When the hour
sounds [97] and death issues its summons and knocks
at. the door, nothing in the world, can keep it out.
Death is a grim harvester. It is absolutely heedless of
the seasons of life. It swings its sickle and takes away
some in the heyday of their summer. It strikes others
when they are in the full vigour of life before their
life-work is finished and they have enjoyed the
greatness they have built. To others who lie lingering
in bed suffering excruciating agonies of pain it comes
with cruel slowness leisurely moving with feet of lead
and leaves them long writhing in the convulsions of
fading life. Its kiss is killing and its embrace is

extinction. It is difficult to look it in the face without
quailing. Its helpless victim lies tossing in bed
fighting in vain to keep off its icy hands circling
round his neck to smother and squeeze out life.
Death's ghastly pallor comes over his livid face the
breath begins to rattle laboriously in the throat his
voice is stilled, he stares with sightless eyes, his dear
ones around him watch with bated breath his every
breath fearing it to be his last, the convulsions of the
body, at grip with the soul struggling to leave it,
grow keener, life gradually ebbs out of him, it dries
up in his veins, the heart ceases its beating, and he
gives up his ghost. Death prostrates him in the dust.
He sleeps in solitude in the cold grave to be eaten up
bit by bit in its decay by worms or is consumed by
the roaring tongues of red hot fire or is torn limb
from limb by vultures who make a meal of him.
Death is man's last sleep from which he wakes up in
the other world. Death sets man brooding over the
whereabouts of the dead who has just ceased
breathing and fails to respond to the call of the
living. It is the greatest mystery, with the solution of
which man is always confronted. Man has ever
longed to lift the veil that hides it and look behind it.
It was an enigma to the first man upon earth and an
enigma still it is to us. From the gray dawn of
civilization man has vaguely believed that the dead
do not die altogether. The Egyptians are among the
earliest of the civilized peoples who have left records
of their beliefs they held some seven thousand years
ago. They could not account for the disappearance of
the individual at his death and conjectured that
unseen and unheard though the dead one had
become, he existed somewhere and somehow.
Though he had dropped his vesture of clay he had

adopted some invisible replica of it and had thrown a
veil over himself and his doings that cannot be [98]
penetrated. The grave where his last remains were
deposited, they thought, was his natural abode where
he lived the life that he hitherto led, but only
invisibly. Naturally enough he hungered and thirsted,
worked and rested, loved and hated, as he did while
alive. So also did the Babylonians believe that the
dead departed to the subterranean regions and lived
their invisible lives.
The Indo-Iranians came to believe at an early age
that at death man leaves behind all that is mortal. His
mortal tenement perishes but the imperishable part of
man, his real personality, his soul survives his bodily
death. Yama was the first to discover the path of the
dead and won for himself the empire of the dead.
Yama welcomed the soul of the dead to his abode
where it was met by its kith and kin that had
preceded it.
Zarathushtra systematically speaks of two different
worlds, this one and the next. The present, or the
earthly world, is called astvant, 'corporeal,' and the
other or the heavenly world is called manahya,
'spiritual,' literally, 'of thought.'1 Body and soul are
the two main constituents in the formation of man.
1. Y28.2; 43.3.
These two have their respective organs and other
spiritual and material essentials. So long as these
2. Y30.4.
work in unison man lives, and lives for the best in this
world. The Evil Spirit has introduced death in the
3. Y45.7.
world,2 which brings the dissolution of these diverse
elements. The soul exists for the short span of its life
on earth in the tenement of the body. When the
material frame crumbles into dust it flees heavenward.
The bodily death does not mean the death of the
soul, for that is immortal.3 Death is not the end of

man's life, for he lives in heaven in spirit and he lives
upon earth in posterity. The present life is a prelude
to the future life. It is a pilgrimage to a higher life.
Man should therefore bethink himself to prepare for
the journey to the next world when he departs from
this life. He will get in heaven what he craves for in
vain upon earth. He will have for actual experience in
heaven the best and perfect condition which he
visualizes but imperfectly in thought on earth.
The belief that he will one day meet the dear
departed lightens man's burden of bereavement.
Death casts the greatest gloom around us. Time, in
its fulness, softens the sorrow of the bereaved, wipes
away his tears, and heals the wound [99] inflicted by
death. But there are always persons of deep emotional
nature and gentle feelings who are disconsolate.
Their dear ones are torn from them whom they
cannot forget. Death lacerates the heart of fond
parents by snatching away from their bosom their
only child that was the apple of their eyes. The
devoted wife in the neighbourhood is deprived of her
doting husband, who was the idol of her heart and
was all that she most loved on earth. Life seems to be
empty and hollow to yet another father who has lost
his youthful son, who was the joy of his heart and
pride of his life. The bereaved grieve and weep, sigh
and sob, cry and pray that God may give them back
their dear ones, who had shared their joys and
sorrows at the fire hearth, but God does not give
them back. The dead have gone to the world from
where there is no return. With the passing away of
their beloved ones, flowers seem to have lost their
fragrance, life is shorn of its sweetness, the world has
lost its light, and everything around seems to be dead
to them. The dead do not pass out of their lives. The

music of their voices lingers in their minds, their
images float before their vision, their faces haunt
them during the day, and they dream of them at
night. If they walk in the garden they think they see
the airy figures of their dear ones under the shade of
the pine trees; if they turn aside they feel they are
followed by the ghosts of their dead; If they close the
door of their abodes they think they hear the dead
knocking at their doors; if they open the doors they
fancy they hear the retreating steps of the dead.
Unto countless millions of such aggrieved persons
driven to hopeless despair, comes the welcome
tidings that their dead ones are living in the yonder
world and they will one day be able to meet them.
Death has parted them now, but they will be united
with them some day. They will themselves go the
same way that their dear ones have gone; only they
have preceded them and are now awaiting their
arrival. When they will go to the world of the dead,
they will meet them face to face, they will know one
another; greet one another with open arms, and live
thereafter together in peace and felicIty. If God has
taken away their beloved before their time, it must be
because in his infinite wisdom he must have thought
this world not good enough for them. For those
whom God loves most, he calls to himself sooner
than others.
[100] The anomalies of earthly life and their final
adjustment in heaven. The unequal distribution of
earthly possessions among mankind, the unequal
opportunities held out to men, the undeserved
sufferings of the righteous, the unmerited success of
the wicked, and various other anomalies of life have
led man by long ages of thinking to postulate a place

where wrongs shall be ultimately adjusted, outraged
righteousness expiated, and undetected wickedness
punished. Death is the entrance into eternal light or
eternal darkness. The order of this world is far from
perfection; the innocent often suffer, while the guilty
escape with impunity; the virtuous poor man pines
under grinding poverty, while the rich man prospers.
The doctrine of a future life of rectification where
justice will be administered with exactitude in
accordance with the divine ordinance, where
grievances of this world will be redressed, and where
every injustice, borne patiently, will be rectified,
gives mental tranquillity and spiritual calm to the
afflicted. A vista of hope thus opens before those
who are roughly handled by this world. This hope
brings peace that the world had not hitherto given
them. It enables them manfully to endure pain and
privation, suffering and sorrow, in the pious hope
that a higher life awaits them in which they will
receive their due. This hope assures man the
continuation of what little happiness he has had in
this world and the cessation of what great misery he
suffered on earth. It gives meaning to the life of the
individual, and inculcates a robust faith in the
goodness of God. Man thus learns that he is not the
sport of some evil-designing spirit who has carelessly
thrown him on this world, resourceless and he1pless.
When in spite of his own honest work and hard
labour he finds himself hopelessly lost in the feverish
struggle for existence, he does not complain that
some unjust and partial Maker has made him of clay
inferior to that of his intensely selfish competitors,
and given to him lesser opportunities for success than
to his rivals in the race of life. The cheerful idea
dawns upon him that the gloomy and dark night of
anguish of his broken heart and troubled spirit will be

followed by an eternal morn which will dispel all
darkness and shed light on his path. He consoles
himself with the belief that his life of misery upon the
earth is a precursor of happy life in heaven. When
life upon earth brings no solace, the hope of heavenly
recompense comforts and sustains him.
[101] Vast numbers of men and women have always
believed in heaven and hell as certainties. The fear of
punishment in the next world has had a great
deterrent effect upon many wicked persons. They
have dreaded death opening the door to their
damnation.
Reward for the good and retribution for the evil.
Looking to the history of the origin of this belief
among the cultured peoples prior to the advent of
Zarathushtra, we find that the growth of ethical
concepts led the early Egyptians to believe in the
judgment of the soul in the next world. The heavenly
tribunal was presided over by Osiris and his
associates. Before each of these subordinate judges
the soul had to declare that it had not committed the
various sins which were enumerated before it name
by name. Its heart was weighed in a balance. The soul
that came out successful from the trial was escorted
by Horus to Osiris who now awarded it bliss. Woe
unto the one who could not stand the test at the seat
of judgment, for a hippopotamus sitting on the watch
pounced upon it and made a morsel of its diet.
The Babylonians did not entertain the belief in the
reward and retributions to the righteous and the
wicked on an ethical basis. The heavens never
formed the abode of the dead. It was in the
subterranean regions full of darkness and gloom
where all the dead departed. Tired by the gloom and

monotony of their imprisonment, the dead longed for
an escape to the world where they had experienced
joy during life. But the guardians of the lower world
kept a careful watch and did not let the unfortunate
incumbents escape to the upper world.
In the abode of Yama, according to the Vedas, was
found sensuous enjoyment, sweet music was heard
and milk and honey and wine flowed amid
abundance of food. There was no sickness or old age
or suffering. In the early period all souls went to the
abode of Yama, but the later belief was that only the
righteous abode in the heavens and the wicked went
their way to the world of nothingness. Immortality
was not inherent in man; he won it as a reward for his
righteous life upon earth.
The doctrine of reward and retribution in the other 4. Y30.10; 31.14, 20;
world forms the chief part of the ethical teachings of 45.7; 51.6, 8, 9.
Zarathushtra's Gathas.4 All precepts in the sacred
stanzas are generally accompanied by a repeated
mention of reward or retribution in this or [102] the
next world, Men of elevated minds may hold that it is
not a high moral standard in which an individual
practises virtue in the hope of reward and eschews
vice for fear of retribution. But to be entirely
disinterested in the acting of righteousness, or to
follow virtue for virtue's sake, is a saintly prerogative.
And the world is not made up of saints. The saint is
the acme in the moral sphere, as is the intellectual
genius in the realm of reason. Both form the climaxes
in the two distinct spheres of human activity. The
world begets tens of millions of average men, in
contrast to the few isolated types of master-spirits
who inspire the world with their boundless devotion
or enlighten it by their profound intellect. These give

a new life and impetus to the moral and intellectual
activities of mankind. The saintly type of virtue is the
goal which humanity feebly attempts to reach.
Humanity, as a whole, is evolving towards this ideal
type of virtue, but meanwhile — and let this be
emphasized till the striven for goal is reached — it
needs some sort of incentive to good conduct in the
lives of its masses. Hence the prime motive of their
embracing righteousness is the hope of future reward,
and that of shunning wickedness is the fear of
retribution. In human affairs we have to be content
with getting something less than ideal.
It is no wonder, then, if we find an elaborately
worked out system of rewards and retributions in the
ethical code of the sacred hymns. The faithful
generally pray, among other boons, for endurance,
durability, riches and happiness in this world, and for
rewards, weal, and immortality in the world to come.
Zarathushtra implores Ahura Mazda to grant him
long life in his Divine Kingdom,5 and inquires what
will bring happiness to his soul.6 In the same manner,
the devout lift up their praises of the Lord to the
throne of the Almighty.7 Ahura Mazda is the giver of
rewards to the righteous as well of punishment to the
wicked.8 He is entreated to grant the riches of both
the worlds.9
The soul reaps as it has sown. The soul is the master
of the body and is responsible for the good or the
evil deeds it has done in this life. Man carves his
destiny for the next world by his thoughts, words,
and deeds in this life, and good or evil destiny awaits
the soul in the next, or the spiritual world, which is
[103] essentially the place of reward and retribution.
The life in this world is incomplete without its

5. 43.13.
6. 44.8.
7. 45.8.
8. 43.4.
9. Y28.2.

prolongation in the heavenly world, for it is only a
life of probation, and the harvest of good or evil
deeds sown here is to be reaped hereafter by the soul
in the world of the spirit. Whether the soul, on
embarking to the next world, will be greeted by the
righteous or seized by the wicked, depends entirely
on the sort of life it has led in this world. If it wins
beatitude, it is on its own merits; if it loses this, it is
equally through its own fault. If it ascends to heaven,
it is owing to its righteous life in this world; if it sinks
into hell, it is due to its wicked life here.
The soul is created pure and innocent. The lost soul
that traverses the regions of inferno after death was at
the first moment of its original entrance into the
bodily world as pure and perfect as the soul of its
neighbour now entering paradise. In the spiritual
world, class distinctions are unknown. There are no
white or black, red or yellow, high or low, touchable
or untouchable souls, as man has most selfishly
branded his brethren from the difference of the
colours of their skin or their low rank in society. The
noblest of souls may dwell in the tenement covered
with the darkest skin; the vilest of souls may take the
body with the whitest skin for its vestment; the
loveliest of spirits may be found in the body with the
ugliest complexion and the foulest of souls may lurk
in the fairest body.
The Bridge of Judgment. When man began to
people the heavens with the celestial beings and
came to the belief that the dead go heavenward, he
naturally began to think of the means to scale the
heights. Nature often showed the beautiful rainbow
spanning the space between the earth and the sky in
glorious colours, and the shining Milky Way paving

10. For parallels to the
Bridge see Soderblom,
Les Fravashis, [Paris,
1899,] p. 70 f.

its circular path with silvery stars. With the
development of the eschatological ideas, the
Egyptians believed that the souls of the dead lived in
the starry regions which were generally reached by
means of a huge ladder.10
We are given in figurative language by Zarathushtra
the image of a bridge, called Chinvat [Chinwad],
literally 'of the dividing one', that connects this
world with the unseen world, and serves as a medium
to cross the deep chasm that separates the two. The
reckoning of the good or evil deeds of the souls takes
place after [104] death,11 and judgment is passed
upon them before they can cross the bridge. The
souls fare here as is their due. The righteous souls
come to this place in pious expectation of the reward
that awaits them. Zarathushtra helps those righteous
souls to cross the Bridge who have devoutly practised
his religion.12 But the wicked souls, who have
estranged themselves from the Path of Righteousness
by their own evil thoughts, words, and deeds, stand
trembling at this judgment span.13 Writhing with the
pangs of their conscience and crying words of woe,
they are now led by their own conscience to
perdition.14

11. Y31.14.
12. Y46.10.
13. Y51.l3.
14. Y31.20; 46.11.

HEAVEN
Abode of the righteous after death. The sharp
antithesis that existed between the righteous and the
wicked in the material world finds its counterpart in
the spiritual world. The righteous in this world
formed ashahyâ gaethâ, 'World of Righteousness,' as
against the dregvants who belonged to the world of
wickedness. The place reserved for the pious souls
that approach heaven is called garo demana

15. Y51.15.
16. Y50.4.
17. Y45.8.
18. Y30.10.
19. Y32.15.

[Garothman], 'Abode of song.' Ahura Mazda first
20. Y46.14.
entered this home of the blessed ones and
Zarathushtra has promised that the faithful of all
times will win admission to it through thinking good
thoughts and practising righteousness.15 The prophet
says that he will sing praise unto Ahura Mazda in
such a manner that it will be heard all along the path
leading to Garo Demana.16 He will carry the dutiful
homage of his own and of his followers unto Ahura
Mazda to his resplendent House of Song.17 Here the
pious souls are surrounded by choirs of celestial
beings. Those who win fair report of their lives in
this world, live in the happy lodgings of Ahura
Mazda, Vohu Manah, and Asha.18 We have already
seen that paradise itself comes to be known by the
name of Good Thought or Best Thought. In one
instance this region of felicity and bliss is called
vangheuh demana manangho, 'Abode of Good mind.' 19
Ahura Mazda with his heavenly host, and the souls of
the righteous ones, live here. He will welcome King
Vishtaspa and other friends of the faith [105] who
have helped Zarathushtra in his mission, to live with
him in the same abode.20
The nature of reward in heaven. The blessed ones 21. Y30.11; Y43.5.
now enter into felicity. To the pious souls Ahura
Mazda gives the good reward which their goodness 22. Y46.19.
has earned.21 The fruition of paradise belongs to
23. Y45.7; Y51.8, 9.
them. Those who have helped the prophet in his
great work are rewarded in the spiritual world.22
There the righteous enjoy felicity in immortality.23 24. Y43.13.
Zarathushtra prays for long life of blessed existence
25. Y44.8.
in the Kingdom of Mazda,24 and seeks to know his
25
soul will reap the good that will rejoice it. The good
leave a good name and fame behind them on earth, 26. Y30.10.
and attain reward in the abode of Ahura Mazda,

27. Y28.8.
Vohu Manah, and Asha.26 The weal of the blessed
ones in heaven knows not any woe; it is the lasting
happiness which is never followed by misery, and the 28. Y53.1.
bliss is without alloy, for the riches of Vohu Manah
are everlasting.27 Earthly happiness is fleeting, it may
be supplanted by misery at the very moment that
man thinks himself most secure in its enjoyment. The
joy of life may at any moment be eclipsed by a
passing cloud of sorrow; but the heavenly bliss is
abiding, knowing no end, and having no pain in its
train. It is the highest blessing of life, says
Zarathushtta, which Mazda will give for ever and aye
to all those who are the faithful followers of his
excellent religion.28
INTERMEDIARY PLACE OF REWARDS
Between heaven and hell. We learn from Pahlavi
works that an intermediary place, situated between
earth and the star-region, is reserved for the souls in
whose case the records of what may be called the
Book of Life show that their good deeds are on a par
with their evil deeds. The strict logic of the doctrine
of Zoroastrian eschatology and the, symmetry of the
entire system demand a place where the souls whose
good and evil deeds exactly balance and who cannot
ascend to heaven because of the heaviness of their
sins, and yet are not so weighed down by [106] sin as
to descend into hell, and find their resting-place till
the final judgment. The Avestan and Pahlavi texts
record in full detail this eschatological doctrine,
while the Gathas appear to recognize either in spirit
or in the abstract, so that we may be justified in
concluding that the concept of the intermediate
place was embodied in the teachings of Zarathushtra
from the beginning.29 Whoso wavers between good

29. Cf. Y33.1; 48.4,
Bartholomae in
ZDMG. 35. 157, 158;
Roth, ib. 37. 223-229;
Geldner, Aus dem Avesta
in KZ. 30. 530.
30. Y48.4.

and evil through his unsteady thoughts, words, and
deeds will in the end find his place in intermediate
region.30
HELL
The wicked are consigned to perdition. In
contradistinction to the Best Existence, the abode of
sinners after death is achishta ahu, 'Worst Existence.'31
The region of hell is called drujo dem&acird;na, 'Abode
of Wickedness,'32 or achishtahyâ demâna manangho,
'Abode of the Worst Mind.'33 Darkness is the
characteristic trait of the inferno.34

31. Y30.4.
32. Y46.11; 49.11;
51.14.
33. Y32.13.
34. Y31.20.

The nature of retribution in hell. The Gathic texts
casually mention that torment and woe, punishment
and sorrow, fall to the lot of the wicked in hell,35 and 35. Y30.8, 11; 31.14,
that the demons greet the lost souls with foul food.36 15, 20; 43.5; 44.19;
45.3, 7; 49.4; 51.8, 9;
This figurative expression and other poetic
metaphors of like nature are taken literally in the later 53.7.
periods, when hell is materialized and the concept of
36. Y31.20; 49.11;
physical torture is systematically worked out. The
soul writhes in agony owing to the consciousness of 53.6.
its alienation from Ahura Mazda. Its vicious life
proves in the end its own perdition. From day unto 37. Y31.20.
day it has made its own hell, and now its own
conscience condemns it to the damnation of hell.37
Duration of punishment in hell. The Gathas speak
of the punishment as lasting for a long period.38 The
idea of eternal [107] damnation, that is confinement 38. Y30.11; 31.20.
in hell, until the day of Renovation, which is
39. Y46.11.
markedly manifest in the later works, exists in
embryo in the Gathas. A passage expressly speaks of
the misery of the wicked souls as lasting for all time.39

[108]
CHAPTER XII
THE FINAL DISPENSATION
The end of the world. The Gathas speak of a period
when the progress of creation will stop, the evolution
of the universe will reach its destined goal, as the
cycle of the world will then be completed and
1. Y43.5; 51.6.
creation and life will end.1 Ahura Mazda will come at
this time with his Holy Spirit, and with Khshathra
2. Y43.6.
and Vohu Manah, to accomplish this great work.2
The world-process will then come to its final
consummation as ordained by him at the beginning
of creation.
The saviour Prophets. The later scriptures speak of
different saviours that will appear in the world at
various epochs to reform it, the last and the greatest
of such saviours being Soshyos [Soshyant], or, to use
the Gathic word, Saoshyant. The term saoshyant, in
both the singular and plural form, occurs in the
Gathas. Here, however, the word is used, not as the
name of any particular individual, but as a generic
term, designating Zarathushtra and his fellow
workers. It is in the Younger Avestan period that we
first become acquainted with a person bearing this
name. Those who by their good deeds work for the
commandment of Ahura Mazda through Good Mind
and Righteousness are called the saviour prophets.3
Ahura Mazda is asked regarding the period when the
wisdom of the saviours will dawn upon the world
through their efficacious precepts.4 Zarathushtra is
the deng-paiti, 'Lord of thc House.' He says that as the
Saviour he will be friend, brother, and father unto

3. Y48.12.
4. Y46.3.
5. Y45.11.
6. Matt. 13.27; 20.1;
Mark 3.35; see
Moulton. Early
Religious Poetry of Persia,
p. 106; 107.
7. Y30.9.

him who hates the demons and those mortals who
belittle him.5 A thousand years after him Jesus as
Saviour uses the identical word and says that
whosoever shall do the will of God, is like a brother
and sister and mother unto him who is the oikodespotes
'Lord of the House' and Saviour.6 To be as worthy as
these saviours who [109] bring about the furtherance
of the world and to be the perfectors of the world,
themselves, is the devout prayer of the faithful.7
Universal Judgment. All human souls will be
subjected to a collective judgment before the
ultimate renovation of the world. The souls will have
to undergo the great ordeal by fire and molten metal,
to which reference has already been made.8 At the
time of the final Dispensation Ahura Mazda will
judge the souls of the righteous and the wicked by
the test of his blazing fire.9 The powerful fire will be
a manifest help unto the holy, but harmful unto the
wicked.10 Asha and Armaiti will help Ahura Mazda at
the final judgment.11 Mazda knows best how to mark
out the lost sinners at the final ordeal of the molten
metal.12 This tribulation will reclaim the sinners.13
Righteousness triumphs over wickedness. The world
of humanity will at last arrive at the stage when Druj,
or Wickedness, will come into the hands of Asha, or
Righteousness. This ideal aim and end has been the
final goal laid out in the Gathas. Zarathushtra prays
over and over again for the period when
Righteousness will smite Wickedness. Every gain to
the Kingdom of Righteousness is the loss to the
Kingdom of Wickedness, and when there is no
Wickedness left Righteousness will reign supreme.
When the law of Wickedness is thus annihilated, the
divine law of Righteousness will pervade the entire

8. Y51.9.
9. Y31.3, 19; 43.4;
47.6.
10. Y34.4.
11. Y47.6.
l2. Y32.7.
13. Y47.6.

world. Even the wicked souls who had revolted from
Mazda in the corporeal world and gone over to the
Evil Spirit will after the retribution come over to
Mazda and acknowledge his sovereignty. As the great
shepherd, Ahura Mazda will bring back into the fold
of righteousness all those persons who, led astray by
the arch-tempter, had left his flock.
The later texts give us a systematic account of the
final struggle between the good and the evil powers,
and relate in detail how every one of the heavenly
beings will smite his own particular opponent evil
spirit. As we have already seen, the Gathas speak of
the victory of Asha, or Righteousness, and the defeat
of Druj, Wickedness. The fate of Angra Mainyu, the
father of evil, is not mentioned; but we can infer that
once the [110] law of Wickedness perishes, its
originator must be impotent; in other words, the final
defeat of Druj signifies also the defeat of the archDruj Angra Mainyu.
The Kingdom of Righteousness; man's share in its
inauguration. In the higher sphere of life man is
taught to go out from within himself and do active
work for others. The truly righteous person does not
live for himself alone, but holds out his own life for
the ransom of others. Man may not rest with working
for the salvation of his individual soul; he has equally
to strive for the, saving of the collective soul, the soul
of all humanity. Every year that he lives in this world
he has to render some distinct social service and
further the sum total of human joy and happiness:
every day that he enjoys the infinite blessings of
Ahura Mazda he has to give his mite in the
furtherance of the cause of goodness. Human society
is a great family, and no single member can live for

himself. No act of the individual can be so personal
that it does not affect the other members of the
group or influence them in some way or another.
Every one has to work for all. The individual is an
important incident in society, a dutiful member of the
world of humanity if he works for it; but an
undesirable burden and a superfluous impediment to
society if he selfishly lives for himself.
When one works for the good of others and lays his
services at the door of society, one becomes richer in
spirit. The spirit gains when she goes out from within
and is prepared to lose herself for the common good,
but loses when she is confined to the narrow limits of
herself. There is nothing nobler for her than the
virtue of self-sacrifice. The righteous sages have
14. Y43.1.
attained to greatness because they were meek enough
in spirit and humble enough in heart to be humanity's
willing servants. These spread goodness around them
and become the means of happiness to others. And
real happiness in turn comes to those who thus make
others happy.14
Various, as we know, are the motives which serve
men as incentive in their work. Some work for the
applause of their fellow-beings, some for the
posthumous name and fame, while still others do
some good work in the hope of some reward in this
or the next world. If a man abstains from evil it may
be owing to the dread of public censure or to the fear
of incurring the [111] divine vengeance and future
retribution; but the truly righteous one practises
righteousness for its own sake. As the patriot who is
guided by the noblest of human sentiments lives and
dies for his country, so the ashavan acts in promoting
the divine Kingdom of Righteousness.

Each age has its ideals, religious and social; and they
vary in accordance with the high or low grades of
civilization, of its peoples. The establishment of the
Kingdom of Righteousness is the one universal ideal,
which knows no change. Ahura Mazda will bring
15. Y34.15.
about the renovation of the world in accordance with
his divine will15 The whole universe moves towards
the realization of this state of perfection, and
humanity evolves towards this ideal. The righteous at
all times help to bring this great event nearer by their
deeds, even though the onward march may be beset
with obstacles, and progress at times may be
retarded, yet it can never be wholly arrested.
Occasionally it may seem to swing back, but on the
whole its move is onward along the path. If progress
and evolution seem to be slow, the faithful need not
despair. In the course of eternity Ahura Mazda has
ample time to finish the work with the cooperation of
the children of men. Human beings that form a
society at a given period in the endless chain of
Boundless Time have to give their respective share in
the furthering of this great work. If society suffers for
the faults of its units, it is because the individuals are
human; out even these faults and these sufferings turn
out to be incentives for the sure and steady work of
advancement. Zarathushtra is the first to give
meaning to human history. There is the great design,
the stupendous purpose, the onward march towards
making a new world, a perfect world. Progress is the
Zoroastrian watchword. Man's birth is an ascent to
the state of final perfection. Each individual has to
join hands with the rest of his fellows in this great
and noble undertaking; he must work to the extent of
his powers and lend his aid, no matter how
insignificant, to the attainment of the ideal end. Man

need not feel appalled by the narrowness of the
sphere in which he can labour nor must he be
staggered at the vastness of the work to be done. The
individual life should add something to the sum total
of the life of humanity. Everyone has to consecrate
his life to the good of humanity. It is a stage in which
[112] everyone feels sympathy for his neighbour and
helps everyone else. This is the common aim that
knits together all men that have visited this earth
since creation began, and must equally unite for all
time those that will inhabit it up to the end of
existence. The eternal conflict aims at the universal.
Individuals in all ages have to work to accomplish
this great end. Each generation profits by the work
done in the past, makes some infinitesimal advance
and adds its own share to the inherited legacy; thus
handing it down to posterity in a better and a higher
condition than that in which it received this
inheritance. At last, by the constant efforts of the
ages and the accumulated work of humanity, the
desired object will be secured. Every effort made in
this direction is a step upward gained on the ladder
leading to the ultimate goal.
The great world drama will then be over, the final
curtain will fall on the tragic element in creation; the
ultimate triumph of good over evil will be secured,
the divine Kingdom of Righteousness will be
established, and all this will come to pass through the
work of man, the chief actor and hero of the human
play, who co-operates and participates in this great
work with his Heavenly Father. Man will then enter
into the everlasting joy of Ahura Mazda. Such is the
great message of Hope that the prophet of Iran
brings to the world of humanity from Ahura Mazda.

[113]
THE AVESTAN PERIOD
FROM ABOUT 800 B. C. TO ABOUT A. D. 200
AT THE LATEST

[114 is blank]
[115]
CHAPTER XIII
INDIA LEAVES INDO-IRANIAN RELIGION
BEHIND
Brahmanism. The millennium that followed the
advent of Zarathushtra witnessed the great creative
period of religious and philosophical thought in the
world. Beginning with Zoroastrianism, it gave rise to
Brahmanism, Buddhism, and Jainism in India, which
form the religion of one half of mankind at the
present day. In addition, it developed Judaism in
Palestine, and Taoism and Confucianism in China.
When the Indo-Iranians separated, members of one
group settled in the Panjaub and produced the hymns
of the Rig Veda. Their descendants, who had by this
time moved towards the plains of the Ganges,
created the Brahmanas and the Upanishads. Apart
from Buddhism and Jainism, which arose in the
middle of this period of religious and philosophical
efflorescence, we may distinguish at least four stages
of religious evolution, namely those of the Vedas,
Brahmanas, Upanishads, and the Bhagavad Gita.

These periods do not exclude but overlap one
another. The Vedic period continued for a
considerable time into that of the ritualistic
Brahmanism, and the Brahmanic into that of the
philosophic Upanishads and the Upanishad period
projects into that of the religion of the Bhagavad
Gita.
The Brahmans officiated at the sacrifices and
conducted religious services for the laity. They
propitiated and placated gods with libations and
sacrifices and penances to win magical power. When
the Vedic language and literature became antiquated,
the Brahmans interpreted and amplified the ancient
texts. Thus arose the Brahmanas dealing with
sacrificial texts based on the authority of the Vedas.
The Vedic poets had weaved religious thought in the
garb of beautiful lyrical poetry. Their descendants
were now preoccupied in formulating elaborate
ceremonials and sacrificial rites. Symbolical
significance was attached to their punctilious
performance. Rites and ceremenies [116] came to be
invested with mysterious power to secure for the
donor his heart's desires. Words specifically arranged
and recited in a specific manner were believed to
have magical potency and were supposed to heal
disease, to win the favour of gods, to rout the
demons, to frustrate the evil scheming of enemies and
to cause them harm. The power of sacrifices was
equally great. The gods, it is said, were originally
mortals and dreaded death, but later won immortality
by sacrifices. Sacrifice, it is added, enables the
Brahmans to compel the gods to do their will.
Ritualism thus rose to a pre-eminent position. Burnt
offerings and sacrifices were believed to procure
earthly gifts and heavenly bliss and to raise the estate

of the soul in the next world. Exhortations for moral
life continued to be made, yet elaborate ritual and
animal sacrifices became the central feature of
religion.
Such elaborate ceremonies performed and sacrifices
offered by a specialized priestly class satisfied the
religious needs of the masses of people. The chanting
of the sacred formulas, the sound of bells and
conches, the odour of the burning incense and of
burnt offerings, descended soothingly upon the
spirits of the vast numbers of people and appeased
their innate human hunger for religion.
But there were some persons of a deep devotional
disposition whom dreary ritualism and magical
incantations which superseded a religion Qf morality,
did not satisfy and they yearned for higher personal
religious experience. They longed for passionately
plunging into the life of the spirit. Such persons
aspired to live religion in their own persons, to
approximate the object of their devotion, to see their
God face to face, to commune with him, and to Jay
bare their souls before him. They aimed at leading
the life of the spirit, but the spirit was encased in a
fleshy frame, and the flesh seemed to them to be
antagonizing the spirit. Beneath their calm exterior,
they often experienced the tempest raging within and
their inner world torn by the coriflict. Evil thoughts
and vicious passions forced themselves into the mind
and tortured it. Their one paramount function, they
concluded, was to quell the tumult of their physical
nature, before they could embark upon spiritual
progress. They betook themselves to ascetic
practice~ to drill and discipline, control and subdue
their unruly bodies. They left their homes and retired
to the forests. They practised various kinds of

austerities, [117] flagellated themselves, emaciated,
tortured, and mortified their bodies by rigorous
devices. They laboured to induce ecstatic state by
fasting, vigil, and use of narcotics, as aspirants to
magical power have been known to do from primitive
times. The austerities and devotional exercises of
some advanced ascetic monks, known by the name of
Shramanas, excited great admiration and reverence of
the people. Even gods, it is alleged, gained their
supernatural power by practising austerities. They
were mortals originally, say the Atharva Veda and the
Brahmanas, and austerities enabled them to defy
death. Sages and saints attained miraculous power by
the same means. Manu speaks of the practice of
austerities as the best means of purifying one's life. By
the close of the Vedic period, life was divided into
four stages, being those of discipleship,
householdership, hermitage, and renunciation. The
great legislator lays down that when a householder
finds his skin wrinkled and his hair grown gray and
witnesses sons born to his sons, he should give up his
possessions, wear a tattered garment, resort to the
forest, and fare on what grows in the forest or beg his
food in adjoining villages. There he should practise
austerities and concentrate his mind on Brahma. The
ascetic ideal rose in great esteem. People whose lives
were saddened with sorrow and suffering, those of
highly emotional nature who were extremely
sensitive to the jars and buffets of life, those who
were temperamentally subject to intense alternating
elation and depression, or those in the autumn of
their lives who were anxious for their spiritual
edification, severed all ties with their families and the
busy world and returned to the forest solitudes. The
cloister attracted recluses from all grades of society.
King Janaka renounced his throne in old age and

became a hermit.
The philosophical religion. Among the forest
dwellers there arose a class of persons to whom the
ascetic life, with its concomitant mortification of
body, failed to bring mental satisfaction. There Were
already germs of theosophy in the Vedic hymns, and
such persons, prone to reflection, began to think
deeply on the great problems of life and death.
Philosophy has generally led its distinctive existence
as a parallel attempt of man to think out for himself
the eternal verities of life, which religion has claimed
to impart through divine revelation. Religion has
acknowledged it as an aid in its [118] need or as a
handmaid to amplify and elucidate its preachings.
Philosophers have stood as a class by themselves.
Their systems of thought have been recognized as
the results of concentrated thinking on the problems
of existence, or as the findings of human reason.
Philosophy has from its earliest days been regarded in
Greece as a secular attempt of the human mind to
solve the riddles of life. India, on the, other hand, has
classed all such thinkers as one group of seers, sages,
or prophets and held the utterance of every thinker
as inspired. The unknown Vedic seer who sings of
the water as the germ of life in the hymn of creation
is giving expression to revealed truth, whereas Thales
of Miletus, who declares water as the first principle,
speaks in terms of cosmogonic philosophy. Kapila's
great Sankhya system of numbers is enshrined for all
time as divinely vouchsafed. When his Greek
contemporary, Pythagoras, preaches that number is
the first principle of the world, he passes as a lay
thinker grafting his metaphysics on numbers.
With the advent of the great thinkers who weave

their metaphysical speculations into creative systems
of philosophy, higher religion in India tends to be
philosophical religion, and metaphysical speculation
becomes religious philosophy. The philosophical
religion thus propounded by the great thinkers is
embodied in the Upanishads. These Upanishads are
appendices to Brahmanas and represent the essence
of higher Brahmanism. They set aside the Vedic
gods. The supreme God of the Brahmanic period was
Prajapati or Brahma, a personal god like the various
gods of the Vedic pantheon. The Upanishads replace
this father-god by the impersonal world-soul. They
teach the principle of divine immanence. Personality
implies the existence of another, as an 'I' to a 'thee.' It
is limitation. According to the thinkers, nothing
exists outside of Brahma; all is Brahma. They teach
idealistic monism. Brahma is the only reality, all else
is illusion. The individual self is a mere reflex of the
Self or Brahma. It is identical with the universal Self.
It is due to ignorance and illusion that this
fundamental truth is not recognized. It is knowledge
that leads the individual to discover for himself that
the outward Brahma and his inner self are one and
the same. Man had always extolled God and
humiliated himself. God was infinite when man was
finite. God was all powerful, man was a weakling.
God was king and man was his subject. [119] Man
looked to God with awe and reverence. He bowed
before him, and prayed with folded arms and on
bended knees. The Indian mystic philosopher is
daring in his intercourse with the divine. He claims
intimacy and identity with God, nay, he hails himself
God, and assures every human being of potential
divinity. When knowledge dawns upon man he can
acclaim with sublime ecstasy, 'I am Brahma.' Man
thus becomes God. and the supreme function of

philosophy is to raise man to his proper estate by
means of knowledge. Divinity sleeps in man, it has to
be awakened. Man is God in the making and
knowledge makes him God. In its keen insight into
the mystery of existence, its scientific value of
philosophical thinking, its boldness of conception,
this all-absorbing monism has no equal in the history
of philosophy. Brahma, as the apex of existence, is
the acme of metaphysical speculation. But being
nameless, colourless, and lifeless, it denies definition
and defies description. It demands that man shall
speak of it in negation only, but better still not speak
at all. It is an impersonal neuter abstraction, a
phantom god in the world of shadowy reality, a god
who is no god.
But the human heart hungers for a God who is a
thinking and willing being, a personal God who can
hear man's prayers, who can bestow gifts, who can
fulfil hopes, who can guide man on the highway of
life, who can protect him from harm, who can award
merit, who can punish wrong, who can forgive man's
trespasses, who can replenish life when it seems
hollow and empty, who can brighten it with gleams
of sunshine when it seems dark and dreary, who can
sustain man when he is downcast, in whom he can
find strength in his weakness, before whom he can
lay his troubles, upon whom he can lean in his
loneliness, in whom he can find refuge when the
world seems to fail him, who can console the heavyhearted, who can heal the bruised and bleeding heart,
who can wipe away the tears of those that weep their
lives out, and who can respond to the human call
whenever and from wherever it comes and whatever
it may be.

The philosophers thus dispensed with gods, but they
persisted nonetheless. Like the rise and fall of kings
and dynasties, old gods were forgotten, forsaken, but
new ones simultaneously succeeded them. The sacred
texts habitually explain and accommodate new gods
by depicting one as incarnating himself in the person
of another or by declaring a new god as being
identical [120] with the old one. Rudra, for example
is seen resenting the treatment accorded him. The
supreme Adorable One pacifies him by saying that
homage paid to one was equivalent to that given to
another, for they were both one and the same. When
Bhagavat or Vasudeva rises to be the supreme God in
the fourth century B.C., Brahma and Shiva are
declared to be his creations and are relegated to
subordinate positions to carry out the will of the new
god. Similarly when Brahmanism later absorbed the
cult of Bhagavat, Vishnu, the sun god who was
popular at the period, became the supreme God.
Thus did the generality of mankind find that they
could not live without personal gods and kindly gods
did not desert them to their fate.
The religion of devotion. Krishna Vasudeva, a
member of the warrior caste, founded Bhagavatism,
the religion of bhakti, devotion or love, about the 4th
century B.C. Bhagavatism arose under the influence
of Sankhya and Yoga. Sankhya being an atheistic
system, Bhagavatism allied itself with Yoga.
Concentration of thought, which is Yoga's
fundamental concern, was converted into devotion to
a personal God. This personal God, whom he termed
the Adorable One, was the objective of man's
devotion and love. This doctrine is later propounded
in the Bhagavad Gita, or the Song Celestial,
originally composed in the 2nd century B.C. and

surviving in its later redacted form. In transcendent
beauty and elegance of form, this philosophical poem
is among the sublimest that have been vouchsafed to
man. It teaches an eclectic philosophy weaving ideas
from Sankhya and Yoga around the central doctrine
of devotion or love to God.
Whole-hearted love of God and duty selflessly
performed in the name of God, dedicating one's
actions to the glory of God, win deliverance for man
— such is the message of the Gita. Rituals,
concentration of thought, and disciplinary ascetic
practices are aids to the life of devotion or love for
God. Love for God leads man to know him better
and teaches him to do his deeds, leaving their
outcome to God. Those who know Krishna are freed
from the binding nature of actions. Those who
piously seek and find refuge in him are absolved of
their sins. Faith, love, and resignation in him sustain
man in this life and open for him, 1ifter his death, a
life of felicity in loving fellowship with God.
New gods thus replaced the old Indo-Iranian gods.
The [121] evolution of religious thought in India
made such a comprehensive and revolutionary
advancement upon Indo-Iranian religion, that it gave
an altogether different form to the religions that
originated during the millennium.
The Indian outlook on life changes. A thousand
years of life upon the valleys of the Indus and the
Ganges had softened and sombred the character of
the robust and joyful Aryan settlers of India. In
common with their Iranian cousins whom they had
left behind the Hindukush, the Vedic singers had
sung of this world in laudatory terms and feverently
prayed for long life in it with its riches and joys. The

hymns of these priestly sages throb with the cheerful,
optimistic view of life. Their descendants of the later
Brahmanic period who speculated on the problem of
life showed a marked turn from this cheerful and
optimistic attitude towards life upon earth to a
gloomy and pessimistic one. The Kshatriyas or men
of the ruling and fighting class produced the
pessimistic philosophy of the Upanishads from about
800 B.C. onwards. They seem to have grown
intensely sensitive to the stress of living. Climatic
influences, political upheavals, racial contacts, and
above all, metaphysical speculations of their great
thinkers are the causes that have contributed to their
altered attitude towards life upon earth. This new
philosophical religion preaches that happiness or
enjoyment of life while living or of the merited good
after death reacts upon the person and condemns him
to several lives in the woeful world. This world is
illusory and soaked in sorrow and suffering. Yet upon
such a purgatorial world man's desire for happiness
brings him again and again to go the dreary rounds of
births and deaths, to live out the karma of his past
lives until, divested of actions and their
consequences, he may, at a dim and distant date, win
liberation from the labyrinth of life and escape
heavenward to rest his world-weary head on the
breathless bosom of Brahma.
Such is the philosophy of life propounded by the
leading thinkers of India by the sixth century B.C. It
becomes the standard philosophy for all time and
generally leaves its indelible impression upon the
subsequent religious and philosophical thought in
India. With the exception of some materialistic
systems of philosophy of the type of the Charvaka
which taught pure Hedonism, the various schools of

thought generally agreed in their [122] estimate of
life upon earth as a life of woe. Buddha and Mahavira,
who founded their great religions at short intervals
during the sixth century B.C., had their minds
saturated with the pessimistic view of man's life upon
earth; The one great thinker whose teachings exerted
lasting influence upon Buddha was Kapila, the
founder of the Sankhya philosophy. It was the
dictum of the Sankhya system, that existence was
suffering. What men considered pleasure was pain in
disguise. Life was pain.
Buddha lays down with greater emphasis than ever
before that life is suffering. Thyre is no cure for the
world-ache. The world is irremediable and not to be
born in it is the only escape from suffering. Life, says
Buddha, is steeped in sorrow and suffering. Pleasure is
gilded pain. Joy is veiled sorrow. Birth is sorrow. Age
is sorrow. Wealth is sorrow. Sickness is sorrow.
Death is sorrow. Union with the unpleasant is
sorrow. Separation from the pleasant is sorrow.
Desire for life is sorrow. Ungratified desire is sorrow.
The tears, he adds, that the weary wayfarers have
shed upon their pilgrimages upon earth make a vaster
expanse of water than the waters of all the oceans
upon the earth. Just as the ocean has only one taste of
salt so, it is said, Buddha's teachings have but one
taste, deliverance from suffering. The comprehension
of the origin and nature of this suffering and the
knowledge of the path that leads to its cessation
bring freedom from birth and death. Life is suffering
and Buddha's mission is to preach the gospel of
deliverance from it.
The philosophy of escape from life. There are
occasions in the lives of all human beings when they

think they cannot adapt themselves to the world
around them. Hard facts of life seem to press very
heavily upon them and they seek diverse means to
lighten the burden. Some like to forget their
environments and seek seclusion in out of the way
places far from society, where they can feel happy to
be alone in the company of nature. They crave the
joy of solitude where they can lose themselves in the
soliloquy of their own thoughts. Men with literary
leanings read so that they may forget themselves for
a time and transplant themselves into other
environments. Society's baseness revolts some who
long to strip themselves bare of the trappings of
civilization and escape to the freedom of primitive
simplicity. Morbidity drives some to seek isolation
from society. Despair and distress drive others to
seek refuge in a world of dreams, where [123] they
can forget the hard realities of life, and live awhile
with their fancies and dreams in the atmosphere
created by their own imagination. They like to
retreat within themselves, seeking the protection of
the inner life against the torments of outer life. Here
they fondly delude themselves to ascribe reality to
their visions and dreams. They people the world with
their own thoughts, make it after their likes and
dislikes. It gives them some comfort to live awhile in
the world of illusion. Many find occasional reverie
soothing. The soothing thoughts of the dream-land
of their creation help them to forget the trying reality
and lull to sleep the burning fever of the tortured
brain. Men of philosophic bent of mind seek to
escape the sordid realities of life by retiring into a
world of mysticism to live in the atmosphere of
otherworldliness.
Among the Aryan settlers of India, we have seen,

renunciation of the world of desires became an ideal
of life. Desire came to be looked upon as the chief
cause of evil. To live is to desire and consequently
suffer in many rebirths. Escape from the life of desires
to seek their extinction hastened deliverance. The
Bhagavad Gita seeks to find compromise by advising
the wise to desire without any attachment and to act
without any expectation of reaping fruits.
Prince Arjuna is grieved at the painful duty his
posititon in life entails upon him to fight his kinsmen.
When he witnesses the contending armies drawn up
on the battlefield, he is struck with sudden
compunction and appalled at the prospect of the
impending slaughter of his kinsfolk. He hesitates to
plunge into the battle array. God Krishna manifests
himself in human form in the person of his charioteer
to relieve him from his embarrassment. On no
account can the prince shirk his inevitable duty,
urges Krishna, even if its performance forces him to
wade his way to the throne through the blood of his
relations. Man cannot escape his duty in life. He
cannot compass his retreat before the actions that fall
to his lot.
Life without actions is unthinkable. One has only to
do his work in such a manner that he may maintain
complete detachment from the consequence of his
actions. Dispassionate and disinterested performance
of actions does not fetter the doer. Thus, says
Krishna, he acts himself, for the world would perish if
he ceased to work. The multifarious actions that he
performs do [124] not entail upon him the necessity
of going the round of existences because his actions
are selfless and directed to the good of mankind.
Action, he says, is better than inaction and he adds

that immunity from action can be had by action
alone. Action should be for the sake of accomplishing
it and not for its resulting rewards. Man has to
perform his duty zealously in whatever station of life
he may happen to be. He has to be utterly indifferent
and unmindful of the fruits of his actions. Or better
still, says Krishna, he should do his deeds in the name
of his God and for him, and dedicate all his activity
to the glory of God.
Ignorance is the penalty that the soul pays when it
enters the body. The senses introduce it to the
fleeting show of the world. The mind broods over
the objects and is drawn in attachment to them.
Attachment gives rise to desire which is insatiable
like fire. As long as man is swayed by desire, he drifts
like a ship that is tossed upon the waves by stormy
winds. Desire, wrath, and greed are the threefold
entrance to hell. By regulating and controlling the
senses, man secures the tranquillity of thought and
knowledge. His tranquillity of mind should be such
as to remain undisturbed like a flame that is sheltered
from the wind and flickers not. He should be
temperate in food and sleep, work, and rest. As the
tortoise draws its head and feet within its shell, so
should he be withdrawn from the outer world of
senses and, retiring to a secluded spot, think and
meditate deeply upon God. When he has attained
this state Of devotional exaltation, a clod of earth
and a lump of gold become of equal worth unto him.
Joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain, success and
failure, censure and praise, good and evil, friend and
foe are all alike unto him and he is unaffected by the
pairs of opposites. Happiness is quiescence and life's
goal is its attainment.

The inherent evil nature of matter, however, remains
characteristic of all Indian thinking. The human body
continues to be regarded as the root of evil. The
moralists teach the strengthening of the spirit by
breaking the body and the ascetic ideal of life is
highly esteemed.
When the Buddhist monk migrated to distant lands
they spread the ascetic view of life in places where
they lived. The Greek philosophers became
acquainted with it at an early date. The Essenes, an
ascetic Jewish sect, adopted it from the NeoPythagoreans.
[125]
CHAPTER XIV
IRAN GOES BACK TO INDO-IRANIAN
RELIGION
The Indo-Iranian cult passes under the mantle of
Zarathushtra. King Vishtaspa was succeeded by
weak kings and Eastern Iran soon lost political
importance. Zarathushtra, likewise, was not blessed
with successors of commanding personalities to carry
on their missionary work. His religion could not
penetrate into Western Iran, where the cult of the
Indo-Iranian divinities had a strong hold over the
minds and hearts of the people. Mithra occupied the
pre-eminent position among them, with the nonIranian Anahita as the close second in importance.
Ahura Mazda outshone Mithra with his transcendent
spiritual sublimity and ethical greatness. Besides, he
had come with profound prestige as his cult was
proclaimed by the new prophet himself. He was

easily acclaimed as the most incomparable divinity
that man had ever known. Mithra, Anahita, and other
bagas, as we have seen from the inscriptions of the
successors of Darius, accepted to work under the new
supreme God.
The stronghold of Zarathushtra's religion was Eastern
Iran. His religion was a reform of the primitive faith
of the Iranians. But the reform did not last long,
owing to the counter-reformation that followed his
death. The excellence of his highly ethical religion
was indelibly imprinted on the minds of the cultured
classes, but it had not reached the masses. They
could not comprehend the abstract ideas of the new
prophet, whereas they found it easy to invoke Mithra
and his heavenly associates with elaborate rituals and
sacrifices. Their veneration for these older divinities,
now in exile, had not ceased. They viewed the
movement of the revival of the Indo-Iranian faith
with great favour. The leaders of the Zoroastrian
Church, on the other hand, were alarmed at this
1. Yt10.92.
growing tendency to go back to the preZarathushtrian faith. They sought a compromise. A
great religious syncretism then took place, with the
result that the successors of [126] the prophet were
obliged to accommodate the Indo-Iranian divinities
in the divine household of Ahura Mazda. Mithra was
the most popular divinity at the period in Western
Iran from where his cult, as we shall see later, passed
on to Europe. It is expressly said that Ahura Mazda
and the Amesha Spentas were pleased with his
religion and accepted it, and Ahura Mazda conferred
upon him the chieftainship of the world,1 Mithra and
his co-workers were made to give their allegiance to
Ahura Mazda and to agree to work as the satraps in
his divine kingdom. The Yashts or hymns dedicated

to the several Yazatas open with the declaration that
they are created by Ahura Mazda. Mithra is created
by Ahura Mazda. The Yasht composed in honour of
the angel Verethraghna, begins with the
acknowledgment that Verethraghna is Ahura-dhâta,
'created by Ahura (Mazda).' In return, Mithra and his
old compatriots secured the privilege of sharing the
homage and adoration of mankind with their
heavenly sovereign Ahura Mazda. Ahura Mazda and
his six spiritual attributes were now openly
recognized as seven impersonations of the cardinal
virtues of Ahura Mazda, and were given a class
designation, Amesha Spentas or the Holy Immortals.
These Amesha Spentas were given the first rank in
the divine hierarchy and the Indo-Iranian divinities
and those of pre-Zoroastrian Iranian origin were
classed under the epithet Yazata or Adorable One,
and assigned a second place in the divine hierarchy.
The Amesha Spentas are thus the archangels and
Yazatas the angels in the newly formed Zoroastrian
pantheon.
With the return of the pre-Zoroastrian divinities also
came the ancient rituals and sacrifices, offerings and
libations. The beliefs and practices of the old faith
were engrafted on the religion. The writers ascribe
them to the authorship of Zarathushtra. He is himself
depicted as glorifying and worshipping the great
Indo-Iranian divinities whom he did not recognize in
his Gathas. He is shown begging them for various
boons. The Indo-Iranian religion that Zarathushtra
came to replace by his religion of reform thus lives as
an indissoluble part of his religion. Zoroastrianism
became a blend of the two, that is, the Indo-Iranian
religion and Zarathushtra's religion of reform. And so
it remains up to the present day, as we shall see in

subsequent pages.
[127] The Gathic view of life persists. When the
ascetic ideal of life became so widespread in and
outside India, it is natural that people of despairing
disposition may be drawn to it. There were, it seems,
some small sects or brotherhoods in Iran that
embraced this view of life. It is evidently of some
such sect that the Vendidad2 speaks with disapproval.
Apart from such sporadic instances, the ascetic ideal
of life is foreign to the Later Avesta. The exhortations
of the prophet about the prime importance of a
physically strong and sound body to enable man to
combat evil, to fight the imperfections of the world,
and to work strenuously for the regeneration of
mankind, are faithfully embodied in the Younger
2. Vd4.47.
Avesta. Self-control and discipline of the body rather
than austerity and self-mortification remain the ideal.
Strong and hardy men and women of rugged virtues
bred of bodily cleanliness, bodily purity, bodily
health, and bodily soundness are praised with
unabated zeal. The view of life remains as optimistic
and cheerful as propounded by Zarathushtra. The
inborn craving of all human beings to obtain
pleasurable states of feeling or happiness for
themselves is fully recognized. The devout yearn for
happiness that they can find in a temperate
enjoyment of the good things of life. The gloomy
view of life which the Indian cousins have now
embraced is unknown to the Iranians. Life is still joy.
3. Vd1.1.
Ahura Mazda has created joy-giving lands for
3
mankind. Three of the many names of Ahura Mazda
are: All Happiness, Full Happiness, and Lord of
4. Yt1.14.
4
5
Happiness. He has created happiness for mankind.
He is himself abundant joy.6 Ahura Mazda has
5. Y21.4

created joy, happiness, and pleasure of Haurvatat, the
archangel presiding over weal.7 Adoration of Ahura 6. Y1.1.
Mazda by day and by night, bring him and Sraosha
and waters and trees and the Fravashis unto the
7. Yt4.1.
8
faithful for their joy. The householders pray that joy
and happiness may never leave their houses.9 They 8. Yt1.9
prayerfully ask that their minds be full of joy.10 Ahura
Mazda is invoked to give joy and happiness.11
9. Y60.1, 7.
Zarathushtra invokes his blessings upon King
Vishtaspa that he may be as full of happiness as
10. Y60.11.
12
Raman, the genius of joy. Abundant happiness
comes to him to whom the Kingly Glory cleaves.13 11. Y35.4.
Mithra gives full [128] happiness to his votaries,14
and the faithful invoke him to come for their joy.15 12. Yt23.7; 24.6.
The angels presiding over fire and waters are invoked
to give great happiness and life of joy.16 Atar is
13. Yt19.54.
17
invoked to bestow joy upon the faithful. The
Fravashis of the righteous give happiness.18 Airyaman 14. Yt10.33, 65, 108.
is implored to come for the joy of men and women
who faithfully follow Zarathushtra.19 The entire
15. Yt10.5
creation that imparts weal unto mankind is invoked.20
Ardvi Sura gives good abodes and joyful abodes and ; Ny2.14.
enduring abodes unto all Mazda-worshipping
families.21 Tishtrya prospers joyful and good
16. Y62.1, 4, 10; 68.2,
22
abodes. Mithra blesses the Aryan peoples with
11; Yt5.26; Ny5.10.
them.23 The devout invoke Mithra that they may
dwell long in happy abodes under him.24 He is
17. Y58.7.
25
besought to give happiness. Ardvi Sura gives riches
and prosperity and flocks of cattle.26 Riches, flocks of 18. Yt13.32.
cattle, and garments are his to whom Glory cleaves.27
The householder prays for an increase of his flocks.28 19. Y54.1; Vd20.11.
Atar is invoked to grant sustenance, life in
abundance, and children of innate wisdom.29 He is
20. Vd19.37.
further implored to grant flocks of cattle and
multitude of men.30 That happiness, glory, riches,
21. Y68.14.
children of innate wisdom, and fortune may never

leave his house is the fervent prayer of the
worshipper.31 Ahura Mazda is invoked to give long,
joyful life.32 Mithra gives courage, victory, fame,
knowledge, bodily health riches, and virtuous
offspring.33 Soundness and health of body, riches,
children of innate wisdom, life longer than long are
sought from the good waters of Ahura Mazda.34
Vitality is asked from Haoma.35 The Fravashis are
asked to give long life.36 Thus are all boons that make
life comfortable;, happy, enjoyable, and livable,
constantly prayed for,

22. Yt8.2.
23. Yt10.4; Ny2.13.
24. Yt10.77.
25. Yt10.33.
26. Yt5.26, 98.
26. Ny5.10.
27. Yt19.54.
28. Y60.3.
29. Y62.4, 5; Ny5.10,
11.
30. Y62.10, Ny3.10;
5.16.
31. Y60.7.
32. Y41.4.
33. Yt10.33, 108.
34. Y68.11.
35. Y9.19.
36. Y13.135.

[129]
CHAPTER XV
PROMULGATION OF THE FAITH OF
ZARATHUSHTRA
The Avestan people. The races that formed the
Zoroastrian fold were the Bactrians, the Medes, and
the Persians, who successively rose to political
independence in Ancient Iran. The Bactrians of the
Northeast, the Medians of the Northwest, and the
Persians of the Southwest, were politically welded
into one Persian nation, under the Achaemenian
empire. This process of blending these different
peoples into one homogeneous nation under the
creed of Zoroaster was completed by the time of the
of Persia by Alexander the Great.
Zoroastrianism takes its root in Eastern Iran. The
Later Avestan texts speak of King Vishtaspa as the
very arm and pillar of Zoroastrianism, the defender of
the Faith, who gave an impetus to the religion, which
until then had experienced only an extremely
chequered career, and who made the faith known and
renowned throughout the world.1 With all the zeal 1. Yt13.99, 100.
and fire characteristic of converts Zarathushtra's
followers worked actively for the promulgation of the 2. Y8.7.
faith. The authors of the Younger Avestan period
depict Zarathushtra as saying that he will exhort the 3. Yt16.17.
people of house and clan, town and country to
embrace the Mazdayasnian religion and teach them
to practise it faithfully in their thoughts, their words,
and their deeds.2 The zealous priests invoke Chisti,
the heavenly associate of Daena, or religion, to grant
them a good memory and strength for their body.

Athravans, the Zoroastrian priests of Eastern Iran.
The generic name for priest in the Avestan texts is
âthravan, derived from âtar, 'fire.' It corresponds to the
Skt. atharvan, the fire-priest of the Indo-Iranian
4. RV.6.16.13.
period. The atharvan, it is said, twirled Agni or fire
and, like Prometheus, brought it from the [130] sky
5. Yt13.94.
to the earth.4 Nature hails Zarathushtra at his birth as
an athravan.5 He is the very first and foremost of the
6. Yt13.88, 89.
athravans.6 Even Ahura Mazda himself takes this term
to define one of his own innumerable names.7 Like
7. Yt1.12.
their Vedic bretheren, the Avestan people divided
their society into different professional groups; and
8. Y42.6.
the athravans formed the first of them. Fire was their
special charge, and it was their special duty to tend
the sacred flame in the shrines, and also to go abroad
preaching the religion of Mazda.8
The Medes and Persians of Western Iran. We have
already seen that the Aryan race had established their
settlements in Northwestern Iran from about 2000
B.C. and that the Kassites and Mitannis had ruled
over considerable tradts between 1700 B.C. and 1400
B.C., The other two peoples of the same race that
successively rose to great power during the first
millennium before the Christian era were the Medes
and the Persians. So close was their racial affinity that
the Biblical and classical writers generally use their
names as alternative terms. The Medes or Mada are
first mentioned by their names in the Assyrian
inscriptions in the ninth century B.C. They
overthrew the Assyrian empire in about 708 B.C.,
thus replacing the Semitic domination in Western
Iran by the Aryan.
The earliest mention of the Persians is made in the
Assyrian inscriptions where it is said that the Assyrian

King Shalmaneser II led a campaign against the
people of Parsua in the Zagros in the ninth century
B.C. These people were probably identical with the
Persians who rose to power later in the further east.
They lived in Pars, known in its Greek form as Persis,
and were a tributary subject people under the Medes.
Their ruling house was known after the name of
Hakhamanish, the head of the royal house, known in
history in its Greek form, Achaemenes. Cyrus
wrested the royal sceptre from the Medes and
founded the Persian empire in about 558 B.C.
Not long after the death of Vishtaspa, the royal
patron of Zarathushtra, the Kingly Glory left the
eastern line of the Iranian kings and thus flew to the
west. With the shifting of the political sphere of
influence, the centre of religious authority [131]
gravitated towards the west. Ragha, hereafter,
became the pontifical seat of the descendants of the
prophet. The temporal and spiritual power here was 9. Y19.18.
vested in the chief pontiff of the Zoroastrian world.9
Religious influence radiated from this ecclesiastical
centre, and the Magian neighbours, who formed the
priestly caste among the Medo-Persians, were
probably the first to imbibe the new Ideas and
gradually to spread them among the peoples Western
Iran.
The Achaemenian empire was made up of various
nationalities of diverse faiths, and the rulers were
always tolerant towards the religions of these subject
races. Guided by political expediency, they often
built or restored the temples of alien peoples, and
occasionally even honoured the Jewish, Egyptian,
Babylonian, and Greek divinities.10 Cyrus ordered the
restoration of temple at Jerusalem,11 and Darius, the

10. Cf. Gray,
Achaemenuans, in ERE.
1, 69-73.
11. Ezra 1.1-11; 3.7;
4.3; Is. 44.28; 2.
Chron. 36.22, 23.

devout worshipper of Auramazda, favoured its
rebuilding as decreed by Cyrus.12 According to the
Babylonian inscriptions, Cyrus restored the gods of
Sumer and Akkad to their former temples, from
which they had been brought out by Nabuna'id, the
last native ruler of Babylon. He returned the captive
gods of Kutu to their home and rebuilt their
temples.13 Cyrus was the shepherd and the anointed
of Yahweh in Judea,14 he was the chosen of Marduk
in Babylon. Darius is called the son of the goddess
Neit of Sais in an Egyptian inscription at Tell elMaskhutah.15 Cambyses, according to an Egyptian
inscription on a naophoric statue preserved in the
Vatican, ordered the purification of the desecrated
temple of Neit at Sais, and paid homage to the
goddess.16 In a Greek inscription Darius reproved his
satrap Gadatas for the reverential attitude toward
Apollo.17

12. Ezra 6.1-15.
13. Cylinder Inscription,
32-35.
14. Is.44.28; 45.1.
15. Golenischeff,
Recueil de Travaux relatifs
à la Philologie, 13. 106,
107.
16. Petrie, A History of
Egypt from the Nineteenth
to the Thirtieth Dynasties.
3. 361, 362. London,
1905.
17. Cousin and
Deschamps, Lettre de
Darius, fils d' Hystaspes
in Bulletin de
Correspondance
Hellenistique, vol. 13. p.
529-542.

The religion of the Achaemenians. Zarathushtra's
new religion took time to penetrate into Western
Iran, and, in absence of any data, we are not in a
position to say how far Cyrus and [132] his people
were influenced by it. It is safe to surmise that they
practised some form of Indo-Iranian religion, with
Mithra, who was steadily rising in influence, as
perhaps the regnant divine power. Darius and his
successors were ardent Mazda-worshippers. These
Achaemenian kings most devoutly ascribe all their

18. Dar. Pers. d.1;
Xerx. Elv, 1; Xerx.
Van. 1.
19. Bh. 1.5-9, 13, 14,
18, 19; 2.20, 25-31,
33, 35; 3.36, 38, 41,
42, 45, 46; 4.50, 52,
54, 56-59, 62, 63;
5.72, 75; Pers. d. 1-3;

greatness and success to Auramazda, Av. Ahura
e. 2; Nr. a. 1, 3-5; b.1;
Mazda. The Old Persian Inscriptions speak of him as Elv. 1, Sz. c, 1.
the greatest of the divinities.18 Darius says with
fervent piety that Auramazda made him king and
20. Pers. a. 1.3, 4; b.
enabled him to hold his vast kingdom firm.
1.3; c. 1.3; d. 1.3; Elv.
Everything that the king did or every glory that he 1; Van. l.3.
achieved was by the will of Auramazda. Every battle
that he won and every army of the enemy that he
21. Pers. a. 1.
routed was by the grace of Auramazda.19 Xerxes
zealously imitates his illustrious father and attributes 22. Bh. 4.12, 13; Dar.
everything of his to Auramazda, and invokes his
Pers. d. 3; Xerx. Pers;
20
protection for himself and his empire. It is again
b. 3; c. 3; d. 3.
Auramazda who brought the kingdom to Artaxerxes
III.21 Though Auramazda is thus the supreme God of 23. Art. Pers. a. 4; Art.
the Achaemenians, it seems there were lesser
Sus. a; Art. Ham. 1.
divinities who received their homage. Without using
their names, Darius and Xerxes are seen expressing 24. Herod. 1.131.
their wish that other gods besides Auramazda may
protect their country.22 It is Artaxerxes who speaks of 25. Berosus. cited by
Mithra and Anahita.23 Herodotus tells us that the
Clemens
Persians did not set up images to gods.24 During the Alexandrinus,
later period, however, Artaxerxes Mnemon first
Propreptica, V .65, 3; cf.
introduced images of gods. He set up the statue of
Cumont, Anahita, in
Anahita in Babylon, Susa, Ecbatana, Damascus, and ERE. 1. 414, 415.
Sardis.25 Arshta, Av. Arshtat [Phl. Ashtad], which
personifies Rectitude is yet another heavenly being 26. Bh. 4.64; see
discovered by Foy in the inscriptions and confirmed Jackson, JAOS XXIV.
by Jackson by close examination on the rock.26
90-92.
Darius says here that he walks according to arshtâm or
rectitude. With the emphasis that Zarathushtra lays 27. Bh. 4. 4.
in the Gathas upon Druj, Lie, Wickedness, Darius
speaks of drauga, Lie, as the embodiment of [133] all 28. Bh. 4. 5.
evil. It is the Lie that incites his enemies to revolt
from him.27 He advises his successor to protect
29. Bh. 4. 13.
28
himself from Lie and punish those that lie. It was
because he did not lie that Auramazda and other gods 30. Herod. 1. 138.

bore him aid.29 Herodotus informs us that the
Persians considered lying as most disgraceful.30 The
Gathas and the Later Avesta speak of the Path of
Righteousness as the only true path,31 or the truest
path,32 and Darius exhorts in the same vein not to
leave pathim tyâm râstâm, 'The Path of Truth,' not to
slight the commandments of Auramazda and not to
sin.33-34 Closely parallel to Y37.1, which enumerates
Ahura Mazda's earthly creation, and which formula is
recited by devout Zoroastrians as grace before meals,
the Old Persian Inscriptions state that Auramazda has
created this earth, yonder heaven, man, and peace for
man.35

31. Y51.13; 72.11; Vd.
4.43.
32. Yt10.3.
33-34. Nr. a. 6.
35. Dar. Pers. g. 1; Nr.
a. 1; Elv. 1; Sz. c. 1;
Xerx. Pers. a. 1; b. 1;
c. 1; d. 1; Elv. 1 ; Van.
1; Art. Och; Pers. 1.

The Persians, says Herodotus, sacrificed unto the sun,
moon, earth, fire, water, and winds.36 The Magus, we
are told, adorned his head-dress with a garland of
myrtle and took the sacrificial animal to the highest
peak of the mountain. He cut the animal, seethed its
flesh, spread it out on a carpet of the tenderest
36. Herod. 1. 131.
herbage, and consecrated it by chanting sacred
texts.37 The Yasht dedicated to Ardvi Sura Anahita
37. Herod. 1. 132.
depicts Iranian kings and heroes sacrificing her a
hundred stallions, a thousand oxen, and ten thousand
38. Herod. 7. 43, 53,
sheep. Herodotus attests to the fact that when Xerxes
54.
arrived at Hellespont in his expedition against
Greece, he sacrificed a thousand oxen to Athene of
Ilium, by which he evidently means Anahita.38 The
sculpture on the Tomb of Darius depicts the king
reverentially facing fire on the stone altar, and the
sun above.
Darius asks the reader of his inscriptions to make
39. Bh. 4. 10, 11, 16,
them known and not to conceal them. Upon him that 17.
carries out his wishes, he invokes his blessings that
Auramazda may be his [134] friend, may there be a 40. Yt8.50-55.

large family unto him, may he live long, and may all
his actions be crowned with success. Whoso,
41. Pers. d. 3.
however, acts against the royal wish and keeps back
the achievements of the king from the knowledge of
the people, unto him, says Darius, Auramazda may
not be a friend, he may not be blessed with a large
family and long life and fulfilment of his wishes.39
The Later Avesta names the demon of drought
Duzhyairya.40 and Darius invokes Auramazda and his
associates to protect his country from Dushiyar.41
The inscriptions do not mention Angra Mainyu. We
have, however, seen that Darius uses Drauga, Lie,
with the emphasis that the Later Avesta puts on
Angra Mainyu, and in thus seeing all evil in Drauga
instead of in Angra Mainyu, Darius is more faithful to
the spirit of the Gathas than the Later Avesta is. It is
true that the inscriptions never mention Zarathushtra
by name, but they undoubtedly breathe the spirit of
his teachings. The royal house of the Achaemenians
is a devout Mazda-worshipper at its rise, it imbibes
the Zoroastrian cult gradually and is fully
Mazdayasnian Zarathushtrian by the time of its
downfall.
Magi, the Zoroastrian priesthood of Western Iran.
Herodotus tells us that the Magi formed one of the
six tribes into which the Medes were divided and
constituted their sacerdotal class.42 They wore the
white robe and covered the head with the woolen
tiara with long flaps on each side to, cover the
mouth.43 The Median empire was short-lived. Cyrus
overthrew Astyages, the last Median king, in 550
B.C. and laid the foundation of the great
Achaemenian empire. The Persians thus conquered
the earthly possessions of the Medes and the Magi,
their priests; but they were in turn conquered by the

42. Herod. 1. 101; see
Carnoy, Le Nom des
Mages in Le Muséon, 9,
121-158; Moulton, The
Magi in Early
Zoroastrianism, p. 182253; Moore, The
Persian Origin of the
Magi in Hoshang
Memorial Volume, p.
306-310.

latter in spirit. The Magian victory in the spiritual
43. Strabo, 15. 3. 15.
domain more than made amends for the loss of their
temporal power. The racial jealousy and antagonism 44. Herod. 3. 65.
between the conquerors and the subdued races,
however, continued for a considerable time owing to 44a. Bh. 1.64.
the Median attempts to regain their ascendency.
When Cambyses heard of the Magian priest
45. Herod. 3. 79; cf.
Gaumata's revolt to overthrow the Persian empire, he Ctesias, Pers., § 15.
exhorted [135] the people never to let their kingdom
fall into the hands of the Medes and the Magi.44
46. Herod. 1.132.
Gaumata had destroyed the structures called âyadanâ,
which the Babylonian version explains as the houses 47. Herod. 7.43, 53,
of gods. Darius restored these temples.44a The
113, 114, 180, 191.
anniversary of the day of the Magian usurper's fall,
known as Magophonia, was observed by the Persians as 48. Herod. 1.107, 108;
7.19, 37.
a great festival, and Herodotus informs us that the
45
Magi kept within their houses on that day. With
the lapse of time, however, the Medes and the
Persians became more reconciled to each other. The
Magi were the priests of the Medes; they now
became the priests of the Persians. This strengthened
their position. The classical writers held their names
in ancient times as synonymous with the wisdom of
the East. Magic and magician are the words
reminiscent of their fame; No sacrifices were offered
without them.46 They accompanied the armies with
the sacred fire, kept it burning on the battlefield, and
invoked divine help for the victory of the king.
Herodotus tells us that the holy chariot drawn by
eight white horses followed the armies of Xerxes.
The Magi made sacrificial offerings at various stages
on the march and prayed for the triumph of the
Persian arms, in which the king and the Persian
soldiers in the army participated.47 They were held in
great esteem, and their exalted position at the court
of the kings ensured them a considerable influence

over the people. They were looked upon as the wise
mediators between man and God. They officiated at
the ceremonies, chanted the hymns, sacrificed at the
altar, explained omens, practised divination,
expounded dreams, and ministered to the various
religious wants of the people.48
It seems that the Magi took a long time to supplant
the religious practices of the Persians by their own.
The two races differed very widely on some of the
main religious observances. For example, the Magi
held the elements of nature sacred. The earth was to
be kept pure from defilement. Hence they exposed
the corpses of the dead to be devoured by birds;
49. Herod. 1. 140.
though the Persians, on the contrary, enclosed the
corpses in wax, and interred [136] them in the
50. Anabasis, 3, 22. 1;
earth.49 We gather from Arrian that Alexander sent
and cf. ShN. 6.56.
the body of Darius to be interred in the royal
mausoleum by the side of the remains of the departed
ones of the royal family of Persia.50 The Persians
continued this practice for a considerable time, until
finally with the complete fusion of the two races they
seem to have exchanged burial for the exposure of
the corpses.
The earliest Greek writer to acquaint the Western
world with the history of the nations of Ancient Iran
is Herodotus, who wrote about a century and a
quarter before the fall of the Achaemenian empire.
Writing at a period when the Persians were in the
zenith of their power in Western Iran, and when the
Magi were the recognized class, he, with the other
writers that followed him, acquainted the West with
the Magi. The athravans, the real custodians of the
Avesta and the guardians of the Zoroastrian symbol of
fire, are unknown to these writers. This may be due

to the fact that Eastern Iran, which was the home of
the athravans, had politically declined, and the
writers are mainly concerned with the Persians of the
west, and their immediate predecessors, the Medes.
The Avestan texts do not recognize the Magi. The
forms derived from the term maga, 'great' occurring in
the Gathas and the Later Avesta do not represent this
priestly class. We find a solitary passage, presumably
a late interpolation, which pronounces a curse upon
those who ill-treat the Magi.51 We may add a passage
in which Ahura Mazda tells Zarathushtra that he
prefers a man who has a wife to one who lives as a
magus, that is, lives in continence.52 The class
designation of the priests in the Avestan text is
persistently athravan. The disposal of the dead by the
exposure to the light of the sun, the reverence for the
elements, fire, water, and earth, the stringent laws for
51. Y65.7.
bodily cleanliness, the active crusade against noxious
creatures, are some of the salient features of the
52. Vd4.47.
religious practices and beliefs of the Magi that we
glean from the writings of the Greek authors. These
form the cardinal tenets of the Vendidad and are all
associated with the athravans, who make up the
official priesthood of the Avestan people. It is not a
Magus who cleanses the defiled by ablution
ceremonials, heals the sick by [137] the recital of the
holy spells, and moves about with a penom over his
mouth, and a khrafstraghna in his hand; but it is an
athravan who exercises all these powers and more.
The sacerdotal class is known by the title of athravan
throughout the texts. It is the only privileged priestly
class that the Avesta recognizes.
53. Y42.6.
Spread of Zoroastrianism in remote lands. The
Zoroastrian missionaries travelled to distant lands for

the purpose of promulgating the religion, and their 54. Y9.24.
homeward return from their sacred missions is
celebrated by the faithful.53 The promulgating zeal 55. Y61.1.
on the part of the Zoroastrian priests seems to have
provoked opposition from non-believers. Keresani, a 56. Yt13.113, 120,
powerful ruler of a foreign land, we are informed,
123.
prevented the fire-priests of Iran from visiting his
country to preach the Zoroastrian doctrines.54 In
57. Yt5.81, 82.
spite of all such obstacles thrown in their way, the
Zoroastrian missionaries gradually succeeded in
58. Ib., 83.
planting the banner of their national faith both near
and afar. They wished eagerly to spread abroad
59. Cf. West and
between heaven and earth the Ahuna Vairya, or the Haug, Yosht-i Fryan in
most sacred formula of the Iranian faith, together
Arda Viraf, p. 247-266,
55
with the other holy prayers. Attention has already London, 1872.
been called to the fact that the Gathas celebrated the
conversion of Fryana the Turanian and his
60. Yt13.97.
descendants. The Avestan texts include some more
Turanian names in the canonical list of sainted
61. Modi, The Wonders
56
persons. The most illustrious of these Turanian
of Sagastân in Aiyadgar-i
Zoroastrians was Yoisht-i Fryana [Yavisht i Friyan], Zariran, p. 126, 127,
who sacrificed unto Ardvi Sura and begged of her a Bombay, 1899; for
boon that he might be able to answer the riddles that further references see
the malicious wizard Akhtya put to him.57 The boon Jackson, Zoroaster, p.
was granted him,58 and the later Pahlavi treatise
137, n. 6.
which bears the name of the Turanian saint adds that
Yoisht-i Fryana solved the enigmas put forth by the 62. Cf. Ananikian,
wizard who was killing all those who were unable to Armenia (Zoroastrian), in
answer his questions. The saint, in his turn, proposed ERE. 1, 794-802.
to Akhtya three riddles, which the wizard was unable
to answer. The saint, thereupon, put the sorcerer to 63. Lidzbarski,
death.59 The Fravardin Yasht60 commemorates the
Ephemeris fur Semitische
Fravashi of Saena, an illustrious convert to [138]
Epigraphik, vol. 1, p. 67
Zoroastrianism. We learn from the Pahlavi works that f., Giessen, 1902.
this apostle of the faith left behind him one hundred
disciples who preached the Mazdayasnian faith in the 64. ShN. 1. 76, 77; For

land of Seistan.61 Armenia came under the
Zoroastrian influence at a very early date, and a
corrupt form of Zoroastrianism prevailed in the
country for several centuries.62 Cappadocia, Lydia,
and Lycia were the scene of an active Zoroastrian
propaganda. The Aramaic inscriptions recently
discovered in Cappadocia mention Daena, the female
genius of the Mazdayasnian religion, conjointly with
the native God Bel.63 India and China witnessed the
spread of the gospel of Iran.64

references regarding
the Zoroastrian
propaganda in China
see Jackson, Zoroaster,
p. 278-280.

The proselytizing work on the part of the
Zoroastrian ministers of the faith was thus carried on
with a considerable amount of success, though we are
not in a position to form any idea regarding the
numbers of the followers of the religion of Mazda at
this period.
[139]
CHAPTER XVI
ZARATHUSHTRA IN THE YOUNGER AVESTA
Zarathushtra is the chief of mankind as Tishtrya is
of the stars. On the banks of the river Darej lived
Pourushaspa of the family of the Spitamas in a small
house.1 A boy babe was born unto him. In
consultation with the elders of the clan, the child was
named Zarathushtra. Nature donned a festive garb,
the sun shone with a brighter glory, trees strewed
flowers, on the ground roses bloomed in luxuriant
profusion, flowers and leaves and grass scented the
air with sweet fragrance, creepers climbed the hedges
in riotous luxuriance, the birds carolled in the air,
myriads of tiny drops of the morning dew shone like
pearls upon the leaves and branches of the trees, the

1. Vd19.4.
2. Yt13.93, 94;
Y17.18.
3. Y9.14.
4. Vd19.11.
5. Yt8.44.
6. Yt13.148.

clouds floated merrily in heaven, the winds made
7. Y8.7.
music in the lofty trees, joy filled the air, and the
trees with their leafy tongues and the blades of grass 8. Yt5.91.
and the grains of sand and birds and beasts and men
and everything everywhere joyously sang: "Hail, for 9. Yt19.79.
to us is born the Athravan, Spitama Zarathushtra."2
He is said to have been renowned in Airyana Vaejah.3 10. Y9.15.
Here did he commune with Ahura Mazda and other
heavenly beings.4 Ahura Mazda made him the lord
11. Yt5.89; 13.41, 91,
and overseer over mankind as he has established
92.
5
Tishtrya the leader of the stars. He was the
embodiment of goodness and righteousness on earth. 12. Yt13.90.
He was the first and best of the divine law.6 He tells
Ahura Mazda that he will lead mankind according to 13. Yt13.88, 89, 91.
the thoughts, words, and deeds of the religion which
is of Ahura Mazda and Zarathushtra.7 Ardvi Sura
14. Yt13.92.
speaks of him as the wise, clever Athravan, who has
mastered the revealed law and who is himself the
15. Yt13.152.
word incarnate8 He is the holiest, the most ruling, the
most bright, the most glorious, and the most
16. Yt17.5.
victorious among men.9 Haoma speaks of him as the
most strong, the most firm, the most clever, [140] the 17. Yt19.56 f.
most swift, and the most victorious.10 He is the chief
of the material world, the head of the two-footed
race.11 He is the first bearer of the law among
peoples.12 He is the foremost in thinking good
thoughts, speaking good words, and doing good
deeds. He exemplifies best in himself the virtues of
the priest, the warrior, the husbandman and furthers
righteousness as never done before.13 The Amesha
Spentas longed for his advent as the lord and the
master of the world.14 He is himself invoked as the
wisest, the best-ruling, the brightest, the most
glorious, the most worthy of sacrifice, prayer,
propitiation, and glorification.15 Homage is paid unto
him.16 The Kingly Glory that belongs to the Aryan

nations is also his.17
Zarathushtra invokes the Yazatas for various boons.
Ahura Mazda asks Zarathushtra to sacrifice unto
18. Yt5.1.
Ardvi Sura.18 Zarathushtra thereupon offered a
sacrifice unto her and begged of her a boon that he
19. Yt5.104, 105.
might win over king Vishtaspa to his faith and lead
him to think and speak and do according to the law.19
20. Yt5.106.
Ardvi Sura granted him the boon.20 When assailed by
the demon Buiti, he offered sacrifices unto the waters
21. Vd19.2.
of the river Daitya.21 Unto Drvaspa he offered
sacrifice for the boon that he might succeed in
22. Yt9.25, 26.
bringing over Hutaosa to think, speak, and do
according to his religion and to make his religion
23. Yt9.27.
known to others.22 And the boon was granted unto
him by Drvaspa.23 He asks for the same boon from
24. Yt17.45-47.
Ashi Vanghuhi and it is given him.24 He invokes the
Fravashis of the faithful to his help whenever he finds
25. Yt19.41.
himself in danger.25 From Verethraghna does he ask
victorious thinking, speaking, and doing, questioning
26. Yt14.28-33.
and answering, which the angel of victory vouchsafes
unto him.26 Unto Chisti, the genius of wisdom, he
27. Yt16.6, 7, 9, 10,
offers a sacrifice praying for righteousness of
12, 13.
thought, word, and deed, agility, soundness of body,
keen hearing, and eyesight.27 He invokes Ashi
28. Yt17.17.
Vanghuhi with the voice that the female genius
declares to be the sweetest of all that invoked her.28
[141] Temptation of Zarathushtra. Temptations of
the prophets of God by the Evil One are recorded in
the lives of the great prophets. Buddha, the
enlightened one, is thus tempted by Mara and
promised universal dominion if he desisted from
imparting his illumination to mankind.29 Satan shows
Jesus the kingdom of the world and their glory and
offers them all to him if he gave up God and came

29. See Nariman, Some
Buddhistic Parallels, in
The Religion of the Iranian
Peoples by Tiele, p.
148-162.
30. Vd19.1-3.

over to him. Several centuries before both Buddha
and Jesus, the prophet of Iran is tempted by Angra
Mainyu. At the command of the arch-fiend, the
demon Buiti came rushing to cause Zarathushtra's
death. Zarathushtra saw through insight that the
wicked, evil-doing demons were taking counsel
together for his death. He chanted the Ahuna Vairya
[Ahunwar] and frustrated the foul attempt of the Druj
on his life. Foiled in his mission, Buiti rushed away
dismayed and spoke unto Angra Mainyu that so great
was the glory of holy Zarathushtra that he could see
no way of killing him.30 Angra Mainyu tells
Zarathushtra that he was a mere man, born of human
parents, and could not therefore withstand his
onslaughts. Moreover, if he renounced the
Mazdayasnian religion, he would award him untold
riches. Unto him the prophet of Mazda retorted that
neither for the love of his body or life, nor if his
breath were torn away would he desist from the good
Mazda-worshipping religion. With the sacred
formulas as his weapons, he adds, he would strike and
repel the evil brood of Angra Mainyu.31 Up to the
end of time, up to the time that the victorious
Saviour came, Zarathushtra tells Angra Mainyu that
he would smite his evil.32 Thus was he first in the
material world to proclaim the word for the
destruction of the demons.33 The demons fled
headlong, weeping and wailing, at his sight and their
malice was extinguished.34 He chanted the Ahuna
Vairya and drove back the demons beneath the
earth.35 Haoma says that Zarathushtra drove back
beneath the earth the daevas that were stalking the
earth in the shape of human beings.36 He was the first
among mortals who brought the demons to nought,
who first proclaimed the word that worked their
destruction, and who first denounced their creation

31. Vd19.4-9.
32. Vd19.5.
33. Yt13.90.
34. Yt19.80.
35. Yt19.81.
36. Y9.15.
37. Yt13.89, 90.
38. Yt17.19, 20.
39. Vd19.4.
40. Yt17.20.

as unworthy of sacrifice and [142] prayer.37 Angra
Mainyu, the wicked and deadly, howled in impotent
rage that Zarathushtra alone succeeded in routing
and smiting him where all the Yazatas failed to
encompass his defeat.38 He bewails that Zarathushtra
smote him with the Ahuna Vairya, the deadly
weapon, which was as a stone as high as a house,39
that he burnt him with righteousness as if it were
molten metal, and that he, the prophet of Mazda, was
the only one who made it better for him to leave the
earth.40
King Vishtaspa helps Zarathushtra in establishing
his religion. Bactria sheltered Zarathushtra when his
own native place had cast him out. King Vishtaspa
embraced his faith and he thought and spoke and did
according to the law. He became the arm and
support of the new religion. He gave movement to
the religion, say the sacred texts, which stood
motionless for a long time. He helped its
promulgation all around and made it prosper.41
Ragha, we are told, became the seat of the prophet's
ministry and here he was both the spiritual and
temporal chief.42 The royal example evidently
influenced many people to give ear to his teachings.
People now warmly welcomed him and heard him
with bated breath. His countenance radiated light
among them and they felt that their souls had
awakened to new life. The faithful undertake to tread
in his footsteps, conform themselves to his likeness,
live his life, and walk in his light.43 Zarathushtra thus
triumphed in lighting a beacon to illumine the path
for mankind to tread.
Allusions to Zarathushtra in classical literature. In
absence of any authentic Iranian data regarding the

41. Yt13.99, 100;
19.84-86.
42. Y19.18.
43. Y12.7.

44. See Jackson,
Zoroaster, p. 150-154,

age and place of Zarathushtra's birth, we eagerly turn 169, 170, 182, 186to the testimony of the classical writers who have
191; Fox and
written up to the time of the close of the Avestan
Pemberton, Passages in
period.44 The information, however, that we derive Greek and Latin Literature
from them is fragmentary and mostly legendary. The relating to Zoroaster and
cycle of legends has formed around him and he is
Zoroastrianism,
undiscernibly remote from the writers. His name is translated into
given variously as Zaras, Zaratas, [143] Zaratus and English, p. 1-82.
Zoroaster.45 Diogenes Laertius says that Xanthus of
Lydia (fifth century B.C.) mentioned Zoroaster by
45. Fox and
46
name. The earliest authentic allusion to him,
Pemberton, Ib., p. 28,
47
however, is found in the Platonic Alcibiades. Pliny
44, 46, 54, 73, 82.
the Elder (A.D. 23-79) says that Zoroaster was the
only human being that laughed when he was born
46. Proem, 2.
and adds that his brain pulsated so forcibly that it
repelled the hand put over it. Tradition has it, he
47. Fox and
says, that Zoroaster lived in a desert upon cheese for Pemberton, op. cit., p.
twenty years.48 Diogenes of Laerte (second century 22.
A.D.) quotes Dino (about 340 B.C.) as saying that
Zoroaster meant one who sacrificed to the stars and 48. Ib., p. 44.
adds that Hermodorus, a disciple of Plato, agreed
with this.49 He is spoken of as Chaldaean by
49. Ib., p. 80, 81; for
50
51
Hippolytus (A.D. 236), or as an Assyrian or
other references see
generally as a Magian or Bactrian. He is called the
Jackson, ib., p. 147king of Bactria who fought with Ninus and Semiramis 149.
and was defeated.52 The Avestan texts are silent over
the question of the age in which he was born. The
50. Fox and
classical writers speak upon the subject, but their
Pemberton, ib., p. 82.
testimony is not reliable. Pliny says on the authority
of Eudoxus (368 B.C.), Aristotle (350 B.C.), and
51. Ib., p. 28.
Hermippus (250 B.C.) that Zoroaster lived 6000
years before the death of Plato or 5000 years before 52. See Jackson, ib., p
the Trojan war, and Diogenes of Laerte quotes
154-157.
53
Hermodorus and Xanthus to the same effect. Pliny
quotes Hermippus as saying that Zoroaster composed 53. Jackson, ib., 152two million lines of verse.54 Polyhistor (about first
154; Fox and

century B.C.), Plutarch (A.D. 46-120), Apuleius of
Pemberton, ib., p. 45,
Madaura (A.D. 124-170), Clement of Alexandria
80.
(A.D. 150-211) and Hippolytus say on the authority
of Diodorus of Eretria (60 B.C.), and Aristoxenus, a 54. Fox and
disciple of Aristotle, that Pythagoras was a pupil of Pemberton, ib., p. 45,
Zoroaster.55 He is generally designated the discoverer 46.
of magic.56 Dio Chrysostom (A.D. 40-120) says that
according to the account given by the Persians,
55. Ib., p. 28, 54, 65,
Zoroaster withdrew from the society of men to live 73, 82.
in a mountain. A great fire fell from [144] heaven and
kept the mountain burning, but that Zoroaster came 56. Ib., p. 22, 52, 60,
out of it unscathed.57 Clement of Alexandria speaks 65, 69, 82.
of Zoroaster as the son of Armenius and adds that he
was killed in war. He quotes Plato as saying that after 57. Ib., p. 48.
lying on the pyre for twelve days he came back to
life.58 Pliny states that it is not certain whether there 58. Ib., p. 73.
was only one Zoroaster or others also bearing his
name.59
59. Ib., p. 45.
[145]
CHAPTER XVII
THE YOUNGER AVESTAN RELIGION
From the Gathas to the Later Avesta, a retrograde
step. We now enter upon a new field of
investigation, and move in an entirely changed
atmosphere as we proceed. The buoyant spirit of the
Gathic hymns is preserved to a great extent in the
composition of the Haptanghaiti, or the section to
'Seven Chapters' in the Avestan Yasna, written in the
Gathic dialect during the transition period that
intervened between the close of the Gathic age and
the opening of the Avestan period. The lofty tone of
the earlier compositions gradually declines, and the
greater part of the Yasna, Yashts, and Vendidad

becomes heavy and monotonous. On only rare
occasions do the texts exhibit sudden flashes of
transcendent beauty and devout fervour. The
growing tendency is for complexity and
concreteness. The Gathas generally dealt with the
abstract concepts. Every one of the Amesha Spentas,
as we have already seen, impersonated some cardinal
virtue. Though Asha, the genius of righteousness, and
Haurvatat, that of perfection, have each a Yasht
consecrated to them in the Younger Avesta, the
abstract virtues of these archangels do not receive
any recognition in these hymns. The secondary and
concrete qualities with new associations loom larger
in the thoughts of their composers than do the
primary qualifications. Rather than dealing with the
righteousness of Asha Vahishta and the perfection of
Haurvatat, the later texts expatiate upon their healing
powers by means of the recital of the various
formulas of magical efficacy and the spells to drive
away the demons of diseases and death. This general
tendency of drifting towards the concrete and
material in religion is the characteristic feature of the
times and endures throughout the Younger Avestan
as well as the subsequent Pahlavi period, in which it
reaches its climax.
Daena, Chisti, Mithra, Raman, Rata, Manthra,
Airyaman, Asha, Hvare, Maunghah, Asman, Ushah,
Atar, and Zam furnish [146] us with instances in
which terms that were used in the Gathas to connote
the ordinary meanings are now personified as angels.
The angels that outshine the archangels. Some of
the Yazatas, both those or pure Iranian extraction
and those of Indo-Iranian origin, have risen to such a
great popularity during this period that they are

honoured more than the Amesha Spentas. The angels
Anahita and Tishtrya, Mithra, and Verethraghna
figure more prominently than the archangels Vohu
Manah and Asha Vahishta, Armaiti, and Ameretat.
Some of the longest Yashts, or sacrificial hymns, are
composed in their honour. The Yasht dedicated to
Mithra, for example, is eight times larger than the
one composed in honour of Ahura Mazda himself.
The archangels, who are higher in the spiritual
hierarchy, who occupied a unique position in the
Gathas, and whose glory the prophet ever sang with
his clarion voice to the people of Iran, have now
either to content themselves with short laudatory
compositions or go entirely without any special
dedication. Some of the attributes that are the
prerogative of Ahura Mazda alone are lavishly
applied to the leading angels; but the authors are
sparing even to parsimony when they confer
honorific epithets on the Amesha Spentas.
Their imprecations upon their careless votaries. A
few of the Yazatas, or Adorable Ones, are conjointly
honoured with Ahura Mazda in the same strain. They
are eager to help man and stand by his side in the
hour of his need, if they are invoked. They help man,
if man remembers them. Moreover, they are
themselves strengthened in their work by man's
offerings. Tishtrya despondently complains to Ahura
Mazda that he is worsted by his adversary Apaosha
because mankind do not propitiate him with
sacrifices as they ought to. If they did so, Tishtrya
would be emboldened and enabled to conduct his
warfare with the demon of drought more vigorously.
Tishtrya complains that people do not sacrifice unto
him to the extent that they do unto the other angels,
who are more popular among them. Mithra, likewise,

complains of man's occasional neglect of his
invocation, which evokes his displeasure. And Mithra
is terrible when angered. Unless man appeases his
wrath by abundant sacrifices, he punishes his
wretched victim mercilessly. Similarly, the Fravashis,
or Guardian Spirits, are the most helpful genii, but on
[147] condition that man propitiates them with
sacrifices. When satisfied, they are of indescribable
help, but once offended they are hard to deal with.
They are to be approached with religious awe. They
are to be feared, rather than loved. This fear of the
celestial beings may engender obedience in man, but
not devotion. And devotion is the higher of the two
virtues.
Ahura Mazda invokes his heavenly ministers for
help. In the Gathas we saw Ahura Mazda cooperating and holding conferences and working in
consort with his heavenly subordinates. The Younger
Avesta gives a picture of a step in advance in this
direction. Here Ahura Mazda is often depicted as
1. Yt5.17-19; 10.123;
sacrificing unto the minor divinities, and asking for
15.2-4.
boons from them. For instance, he prays to Ardvi
Sura, Mithra, and Vayu for favours, and they grant
2. Yt15.44.
him these boons.1 Vayu even goes further and says he
does good to Ahura Mazda.2 The Fravashis helped
3. Yt13.12, 19.
Ahura Mazda, and the Lord himself says that had he
not received their help, great would have been the
4. Yt8.52; 10.1.
difficulty.3 But even here it is expressly said that all
these beings whom Ahura Mazda invokes for help are
5. Yt8.25-29.
his creations. It is he himself who has made Tishtrya
and Mithra as worthy of honour, sacrifice, and prayer
as himself.4 Rather than commanding his envoys and
viceroys as the sovereign ruler to put his orders into
execution, he solicits their co-operation in his work.
Besides, Ahura Mazda's offering sacrifices unto other

beings turns out a source of help to them. Tishtrya in
his distress looks to Ahura Mazda for help. Mazda,
thereupon, sacrifices unto him, which gives Tishtrya
renewed vigour and strength to fight his adversary
Apaosha.5
Ceremonial implements, textual passages, and
objects and expressions that share invocation. In
6. Y6.18; 7.26.
common with the Vedas, the Avestan texts deify the
ritual implements, textual passages of the scriptures,
7. Y59.28; 71.18.
and other like objects. The expressions of invocation
and sacrifice applied to them are the same as those
8. Y71.12, 18.
used in honour of Ahura Mazda, the Amesha Spentas,
and the Yazatas. The following are the objects that
9. Vr16.3.
come in for a share of invocation in the ritual:
Haoma, Aesma or the wood for the [148] fire altar,6
10. Yt13.74.
Baresman or the sacred twigs, Zaothra or libations,
one's own soul and Fravashi,7 the Gathas, the
11. Y22.25; 25.6;
chapters of the Yasna Haptanghaiti,8 metres, lines,
Yt2.1; Sr1.2, 29; 2.2,
words of the chapters of the Haptanghaiti,9 intellect,
29.
conscience,10 knowledge,11 and even sleep.12 Thus the
creator and his creature, angel and man, ceremonial
12. Vr7.3.
implements and scriptural texts are all alike made the
objects of adoration and praise.
Zarathushtra's monologues in the Gathas as against
his dialogues in the Avesta. In the Gathas the
prophet addressed several questions to Ahura Mazda,
but the replies were left to be inferred from the
context. An advance is made upon this method, and
now we have Zoroaster depicted as putting questions, 13. Vd2.21, 22.
and Ahura Mazda himself as answering them
categorically. To invest their compositions with
divine sanction and prophetic authority, the later
sages wrote in the form of a dialogue between Ahura
Mazda and his prophet. The greater part of the

Vendidad and some of the Yashts are composed in
this style. Escorted by the celestial Yazatas, Ahura
Mazda comes down to Airyana Vaejah to attend a
meeting of mortals convened by Yima, and warns
him of the coming destructive winter and frost.13
The Avesta looks with unrelenting abhorrence upon
idols and images of divinities. Idolatry in any form is
sin. The Shah Namah abounds in passages depicting
the Persian kings and heroes as conducting a crusade
against idols and idol-worship. The conquering
armies of Persia always destroyed the idols and razed 14. 1.131.
their temples to the ground. Herodotus writes that
15. Diogenes Laertius,
the Persians did not erect idols.14 Sotion adds that
they hated idols.15The statues of different divinities Prooem. 6.
were, however, not unknown among the
Achaemenians. The winged figure floating over the 16. Cited by Clemens
head of Darius on the rock sculptures at Behistan is Alexandrinus,
probably a representation of Auramazda. We have it Protreptica, 5, 65, 3.
on the authority of Berosus that the Achaemenian
king Artaxerxes Mnemon (B.C. 404-358) had statues 17. P. 733.
erected to Anahita in Babylon, [149] Ecbatana, Susa,
Persepolis, Bactria, Damascus, and Sardis.16 Strabo
describes the image of Omanus, that is, Vohu Manah,
as being carried at a later period in procession in
Cappadocia.17
We find no traces of such open disregard of the
genuine teachings of the faith, when the priesthood
firmly established its influence. Orthodox
Zoroastrianism never sanctioned any form of idolworship in Iran.
The Yazatas, or angels, Tishtrya, Verethraghna,
Dahma Afriti, and Damoish Upamana introduce a
novel feature in the theology of this period. They are

pictured as assuming various forms or man, horse, and
other objects in the performance of their allotted
work.

[150]
CHAPTER XVIII
THE IDEA OF GOD IN THE MILLENNIUM
Notes: Yahweh, the only God of the Hebrews. We have already seen the
eclipse of the old gods and the rise of the new ones in India during the
millennium that opened with Zarathushtra and ended with the advent of
Jesue. The monotheistic idea greatly developed during this period among the
Jews who were a subject race under the Persians and whose religion was
influenced by Zoroastrianism. As Judaism later gave much to Christianity
and Mohammedanism, the knowledge of the belief in the godhead among
this people is of great interest, and we shall discuss it in brief.
A race of sturdy nomads of Semitic stock tending their flocks from times
immemorial in the Arabian desert, of handsome features with prominent
aquiline nose, is seen settling down in Palestine about thirteen centuries
before the Christian era. Many of their kinsmen had laboured and suffered as
slaves in Egypt, until Moses brought them deliverance. The Hebrews, as the
people are known to history, found their new settlement already populated
by the civilized Canaanites. The new-comers intermarried with them and
adopted their civilization. They succeeded later in founding a kingdom, and
under the heroic ruler David, Jerusalem became the centre of Jewish religious
life and the sanctuary of their national God Yahweh. During the period of
the divided kingdoms of Judah and Israel prophetic literature of great value
arose and enriched human thought. The kingdom of Israel ended in 721
B.C., and Judah met with her destruction in 586 B.C. The Persians brought
the Jews deliverance and allowed them to restore the temple of Jerusalem
that was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. They flourished under the tolerant
Persian rule, codified their religious laws, collected and copied the sermons
and teachings and songs and ancient writings that they stilt possessed. Thus
in a few centuries more there [151] came into being the scriptures known as
the Old Testament, the most precious legacy of the Hebrews to mankind.
When they had lived in small groups, each tribe had its God, whom the
people worshipped. Gradually a more powerful God from among these won

the universal respect of the race. He was Yahweh, worshipped in the earlier
stages in the form of a brazen serpent, until the idol worship gave place to a
purer form of godhead. His dominion over men was contested by Baal of
Tyre who received devotion from the people side by side with him both in
Israel and Judah. Yahweh ultimately came out successful nnd remained the
only God of the Hebrews. The prophet Amos (760 B.C.) raised him to
monotheistic grandeur and spoke as the mouth-piece of Yahweh. Hosea and
Isaiah preach against idolatry and the prophets are incessantly enjoining
upon the people not to make idols or graven images and they exhort them
not to worship any other God but Yahweh. It is said that Yahweh is a jealous
God and brooks no homage but to him. The children of Israel had suffered
in Egypt where they were in bondage. God heard their groaning and had
compassion on them. He appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire, burning in a
bush, and said that he had come down to deliver the suffering children of
Israel from bondage to a place flowing with milk and honey. He gave him
ten commandments for the guidance of the people. Therein he demands that
man shall fear him, walk in his ways, cleave unto him, obey him, love him,
and serve him with all his heart and all his soul. He has chosen Israel unto
himself above all people as a beacon of light and righteousness to mankind.
Consequently, he demands that they shall serve him faithfully, and
transgress not his commandments. If people walk in the Lord's statutes and
keep his commandments, he gives them seasonal rains, full crops, protection
against the attacks of animals and men, victory and offspring. He goes with
the armies of Israel to the battlefield and fights for them against the enemies.
But when they transgress his commandments, worship idols or other gods or
turn apostates, he breaks the pride of their power, lets loose their enemies
over them, and chastises them by visiting their country with plagues and
pestlences, famines and droughts, desolation and death. It was for the
inequities of his wayward children that Yahweh sent Tiglath-Pileser as his
scourge to punish them and put them under [152] the Assyrian yoke. The
prophet Isaiah tells the people that Yahweh uses Assyria as his rod to punish
them. Those who seek Yahweh, find him. He does not fail or forsake them.
But when they forsake him, and provoke him to anger, he casts them away
forever. But even then if people repent, humble themselves before him, fall
down on their faces, rend their clothes, and weep, he relents, forgives them,
comes back to them, takes them under his protecting wings, helps them, and

prospers them. The Psalms and Prophets are replete with higher ethical
sentiment and aim at reforming the motives of conduct rather than
regulating it by ceremonial observances. They are full of fervent expressions
of religious emotion. God is depicted here as the compassionate Father who
looks to all as his children. Judaism prepares the way for a nobler type of
godhead that was to be preached by Jesus.
Taoism and Confucianism. Animism and ancestral worship ministered to the
spiritual needs of the people in China from the earliest times. As in the other
parts of the world, the higher conceptions of gods or of some one supreme
principle like Heaven as God were gradually evolving among the sages.
Tradition places the Golden Age of China in about 3000 B.C. But the
authentic historical records do not go beyond a millennium before the
Christian era. It is in this period that great religious and social ideals were
preached that have shaped the Chinese life for all time. The country was
harassed by feudal warfare, and famine and pestilence worked havoc, adding
to the misery of the people. Perplexed at the visitation of misfortunes and
calamities, wail goes up to Heaven from a poet in the eighth century B. C.
complaining that Heaven is unjust and merciless in its dealings with
mankind. Such complaints are however drowned in the chorus that Heaven
does not will evil. It is man's own fault, in consequence of which he suffers.
Man is born good, it is said, but when he goes astray from the path of
goodness, he brings calamity on his head. When there were strife and chaos
stalking the earth, the sages felt that peace and harmony reigned above in
heaven. Perfect was the Way or Heaven or the Tao or the one universal
principle, the ultimate reality. Happiness would fall to the lot of mankind, if
it followed faithfully the Way. The imitation of the Way or Heaven was
therefore the ideal of earthly conduct. It was virtue and virtue brought [153]
happiness. Man's duty was to cultivate the Way and the sages undertook to
teach it to mankind. The Way was one which to all thinkers looked alike,
but the methods of reaching it as taught by them were different.
Lao-tze, a great mystic born in 601 B.C., is the founder of Taoism. He
teaches quietism. Confucius (551-479 B.C.) is the man of the world and
teaches a moral code of personal conduct. His relgion is a discipline of life
and his system is a reaction against Taoism.

[154]
CHAPTER XIX
AHURA MAZDA
Ahura, Mazda, and Ahura Mazda. The name of God still retains its two
elements separate. These have not yet coalesced into one word. In the
metrical sections of the Younger Avesta the two elements are sometimes used
apart from each other, or either one of the terms may be used to designate
the Supreme Being, but in the prose compositions the collocation Ahura
Mazda generally occurs as a compound phrase. In the formation of
compounds, however, either Ahura or Mazda alone is used for the sake of
convenience. The Ahura compounds such as Ahura-dhâta, 'created by Ahura,'
Ahura-tkaesha, 'of the faith of Ahura,' or the adjectival form âhuiri, 'of Ahura,'
invariably represent the divine lord Ahura Mazda. Similarly, the Mazda
element in the compounds Mazda-dhâta, 'created by Mazda,' Mazda-yasna,
'worshipper of Mazda,' Mazdo-frasasta, 'taught by Mazda,' Mazdo-fraokhta, or
Mazdaokhta, 'spoken by Mazda,' invariably stands for Ahura Mazda himself.
Ahura Mazda is the highest object of worship. Ahura Mazda still holds
sovereign sway over both the worlds; his authority in the world of
righteousness is undisputed, and his imperial right is unchallenged. He is the
greatest and the very best of the angels.1 The Old Persian Inscriptions speak
of him as the greatest of the divinities.2 The archangels and angels dutifully
carry out Mazda's orders. Reverence for him has never abated, and adoration
of him does not languish with the advent again of the old Indo-Iranian
divinities. Like the dual divinities Varuna-Mitra who received joint
invocation during the Indo-Iranian period, Ahura-Mithra or Mithra-Ahura
are invoked together. Ahura generally takes precedence and Mithra stands
second in the compound,3 but in the Nyaishes composed in [155] honour of
Hvare Khshaeta or the sun and Mithra, as also in the Yasht dedicated to
Mithra,4 the order is reversed and we have then Mithra-Ahura. He is yet the
sublimest goal of human aspiration. The best of all sacrifices and invocations
are those of Mazda.5 1. Y16.1; Yt17.16.
2. Dar. Pers. d. 1; Xerx. Elv. 1; Xerx. Van. 1.

3. Y1.11; 2.11; 3.13; 4.16; 6.10; 7.13; 17.10; 22.13.
4. Ny1.7; 2.7, 12; Yt10.113, 145.
5. TdFr.28. The faithful acknowledge their indebtedness to Ahura Mazda
and devoutly offer to him their homage and sacrifice.6 They worship him
with the very life of the body,7 and they long to reach him through the
medium of fire, through the Good Mind, through Righteousness, and
through the deeds and words of wisdom, as well as through good thoughts,
good words, and good deeds.8 Ahura Mazda, in fact, is implored to be their
very life and limb in both the worlds.9 It is through the Best Righteousness
that the true in heart aspire to behold the Lord to approach him, and to
associate with him,10 The attainment of the companionship and the
Kingdom of Ahura Mazda is the pious wish of the supplicant.11
6. Y13.5.
7. Y37.3.
8. Y36.1, 4, 5.
9. Y41.3.
10. Y60.12.
11. Y40.2; 41.2, 5, 6. Mazda's titles. The Yasna sacrifice opens with the
praise of Ahura Mazda and enumerates the following divine titles: maker,
radiant, glorious, the greatest, the best, the most beautiful, the most firm, the
most wise, of the most perfect form, the highest in righteousness, possessed
of great joy, creator, fashioner, nourisher, and the Most Holy Spirit.12 He is
all-pervading. There is no conceivable place where he is not. Closer than the
nose is to the ears, or the ears are to the mouth, is he to all that which the
corporeal world thinks, speaks, and does.13 He is the greatest temporal and
spiritual lord.14 He is the absolute ruler.15 He is the most mighty and
righteous.16 He is benevolent.17 He is the maker, the most holy, the most

wise, and the best one to answer when questioned.18 His is the omnisscent
wisdom.19 He is undeceivable.20 He is omniscient and never sleeping.21
Radiant and glorious are the most frequent epithets with which the texts
open the invocation to the divinity. [156] Above all Ahura Mazda is the
spirit of spirits.22 This essential trait stands intact through all changes in the
concept of God. He is not invested with any anthropomorphic chracter, and
his multifarious epithets are truly the figurative expressions of human
language used by man in his feeble attempt to give vent to an outburst of the
feelings of devotion and reverence for his Heavenly Father. Ahura Mazda is
synonymous with light, even as his opponent is identical with darkness, and
the sun is spoken of as his most beautiful form.23 Just as the Rig Veda speaks of
the sun as the eye of Mithra and Varuna,24 so do the Avestan texts call the
sun the eye of Ahura Mazda.25 Speaking about the nature of Ahuta Mazda,
Plutarch well remarks that among objects of sense the Zoroastrian godhead
most of all resembles the light.26 The star-spangled heaven is his garment;27
the holy spell is his soul.28 Many are the names by which mankind have
learnt to know him. The first Yasht, which is dedicated to him, enumerates
seventy-four of these attributes. They are all descriptive of his wisdom, farsightedness, power, righteousness justice, and mercy.29
12. Y1.1.
13. TdFr. 58, 59.
14. Y27.1; Vr11.21.
l5. Y21.3.
16. Y56.1.
17. Y38.4.
18. Vd18.7, 13, 66.
19. Vr19.1.

20. Yt12.1.
21. Yt12.1; Vd. 19.20, 26.
22. Y4.7.
23. Y36.6; 28.8.
24. RV. 1.115.1; 6.51.1; 7.61.1; 63.1; 10.37.
25. Y1.11; 3.13; 4.16; 7.13; 22.13.
26. Is. et Os. 46.
27. Yt13.3.
28. Yt13.81.
29. Yt1.7, 8, 12-15.
Only the world of righteousness is created by Ahura Mazda. As the
antithesis between the Deity and the Evil Spirit is now most strongly marked
in the Later Avesta, the godhead is expressly described as the creator of
everything that is good,30 evil being the counter-creation of Angara Mainyu.
Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu in the younger texts are described as
creating good and evil in turn. The archangels are Mazda's creations;31 so
also are the angels and men, the animals, sky, water, trees, light, wind, and
earth.32 In the various enquiries which Zarathushtra addresses to Ahura
Mazda in the Vendidad, the divinity is portrayed as the creator of corporeal
world. Ahura expressly says to Zarathushtra that he has created everything in
[157] the world, and yet nothing in his creation comes up to the level of
man, who is the greatest and the best of all creations.33 Through the wisdom
of Ahura Mazda the world has come into being, and through his divine
wisdom it will come also to an end.34
30. Y71.10; Vr11.5; Vd11.1.

31. Yt1.25.
32. Y1.1, 2, 12; 2.12; 12.7; 17.12; 37.1; 38.3; Vr7.4; Vd19.13, 16, 35; 21.4, 8,
12; Aog. 30.
33. Aog. 30.
34. Yt1.26. [158]
CHAPTER XX
SPENTA MAINYU
Belief in an intermediary spirit between God and the world. From the days
of Thales (about 600 B.C.), the head of the school of Miletus, the Greek
thinkers were in touch with the Orient. The Ionians were in close contact
with the Persians. Pythagoras, we have seen, was believed by the classical
writers to have been the pupil of Zoroaster, though several centuries
intervened between them. Numenius of Apamea says that Pythagoras and
Plato reproduce the ancient wisdom of the Magi and Brahmans, Egyptians
and Jews. Alexandria became later a cosmopolitan seat of learning, and the
intellectual East and West met there. It was here that Judaism and afterwards
Christianity were Hellenized. The wisdom of the East was held in high
esteem at Alexandria. Persian influence, it seems, had been felt in Greece in
the early formative period of its philosophy. Zarathushtra, we have noticed,
postulated a quasi-independent spirit intermediary between the godhead and
the universe, Anaxagoras calls it nous, acting between God, and the world as
the regulating principle of existence. Plato says in his Timaeus that the
universe becomes an organism through the universal World-Soul that is
created by the Demiurge, the Supreme Deity. The Old Testament Tefers to
the Spirit of Yahweh.1 Philo Judaeus unites the Greek and Jewish ideas about
Logos and says that Logos is the first-born Son of God and acts as a
viceregent of God between God and the world. He is the prototypal Man
after whose image all men are created. Logos is something more than Plato's
Idea of the Good, because, like Spenta Mainyu, he is creatively active. In
common with Spenta Mainyu, Logos is not a personal being, and like Spenta

Mainyu again, he appears sometimes as identified with God and at other
times seems to be an attribute of God. The Avestan texts refer to Spenta
Mainyu and his adversary Angra Mainyu as thworeshtar or the fashioners [159]
or cutters and, speaking about the work of Logos, Philo speaks of him as
Tomeus, 'the cutter,' employing the word of the same meaning. Again as
Spenta Mainyu or the spirit of light is shadowed by the opposite spirit of
darkness, so Logos, says Philo, is the Shekinah or Glory or Light of God, but
he is also the darkness or shadow of God. This is so because, he adds, the
creature reveals only half the creator and hides the other half. In the Book of
Wisdom of Solomon, Wisdom, identical with the Greek Logos, is the divine
essence, living a quasi-independent existence in God and side by side with
God. She works as the active agent of god in the creation of the world. In
Mithraism, Mithra held the position of the Mediator between God who was
unknowable and unapproachable and mankind. He fashioned the world as
Demiurge. The intermediary Spirit of God occurs throughout the New
Testament. Numenius of Apamea, writing in the second century, says that
God has bestowed divine qualities upon a second god who acts in the world
as the power for good. The Supreme God or the First principle, he adds,
works in the spiritual world, whereas the activity of the second god extends
to the spiritual as well as material world. Origen, writing shortly after him,
says that God created Logos or the Son. His relation to the Father is the
same as that which exists between Ahura Mazda and Spenta Mainyu. The
Son or Logos, says Origen, is co-eternal and co-equal with the Father, but
the Son is lesser than the Father. Clement of Alexandria says that Logos,
represents the will, power, and energy of God. He is the creator on behalf of
God. He has introduced harmony in the universe and conducts its affairs as
the pilot.
1. Genesis 1.2. The relation between Ahura Mazda and his Holy Spirit. It
remains as subtle in the Younger Avestan texts as it was in the Gathas. We
have already seen in the treatment of this highly abstract concept, as it is
portrayed in the Gathic texts, that the term Spenta Mainyu either designated
Ahura Mazda as his divine attribute, or occurred as a being separate from the
godhead. The Later Avestan texts, it seems to us, lead us to the idea that
Spenta Mainyu has no independent existence apart from Ahura Mazda, in
other words, as shown above, he is not a personal being. The Later Avesta,

moreover, as we shall see in the subsequent pages, teaches that all earthly
and heavenly [160] beings, belonging to the Kingdom of Goodness,
including Ahura Mazda himself, have their Fravashis, or Guardian Spirits.
Spenta Mainyu alone in the realm of the good is without his Guardian Spirit.
Furthermore, Spenta Mainyu does not receive homage and invocation from
man, as do Ahura Mazda, the Amesha Spentas, and the Yazatas. In one
passage the faithful dedicate their thoughts, words, deeds, and all to him.2
Spenta Mainyu, therefore, may be taken as an atttibute of Ahura Mazda
which is either conjointly used with the godhead as his distinguishing
epithet, or occurs alone by itself to designate the Supreme Being. In this
latter use, it may be said, Spenta Mainyu represents Ahura Mazda, in the
same manner as the royal title 'His Majesty' is frequently used as a substitute
for the name of a king. 2. Y58.6. In contradistinction to the evil creation of
Angra Mainyu, or the Evil Spirit, the Avestan texts speak of the good
creation as belonging to Spenta Mainyu, the Holy Spirit.3 He maintains the
sky, the waters, the earth, the plants, and the children to be born.4 The stars
also are spoken of as the creatures of the Holy Spirit.5 He created Mithra's
chariot, inlaid with stars and made of heavenly substance.6 He is spoken of as
the holier of the two spirits.7 He struggles with Angra Mainyu to seize the
Kingly Glory [khwarrah].8 Characteristic or the highly developed type of
dualism of the Younger Avestan period, we find that the two rival spirits
divide their sphere of influence in regard to the wind, or Vayu. The
moderate wind that is conducive of good is called the wind of Spenta
Mainyu,9 and only to this good part of Vayu are the faithful to offer
sacrifice.10 Snavidhka, a tyrant foe of the Iranian hero Keresaspa, haughtily
exclaims that if he ever grew to manhood he would make the heavens his
chariot, convert the earth into a wheel, bring down Spenta Mainyu, or the
Holy Spirit, from the shining paradise, and make Angra Mainyu, or the Evil
Spirit, rush up from the dreary hell, and [161] compel them to draw his
chariot.11 In a couple of instances Ahura Mazda is depicted as speaking of the
Holy Spirit as a part of himself. Speaking about the great work of the
Fravashis, or the Guardian Spirits, Ahura Mazda says that had not the
Ftavashis helped him, the wicked Druj would have smitten the good
creation, and it would never have been possible for Spenta Mainyu to deal a
blow to Angra Mainyu.12 Ahura Mazda sacrifices unto Vayu and asks from
this angel of wind a boon, that he may smite the creation of Angra Mainyu

but that none may smite the cteation of Spenta Mainyu.13 3. Y1.16; 8.6,
11.13; 17.2; 57.17; Vr12.4; Yt6.2; 8.48; 11.11; 13.76; 15.3, 43, 44; Vd3.20;
5.33; 13.1, 2, 5, 6, 16.
4. Yt13.28, 29.
5. Y1.11; 3.13; 4.16; 7.13; 22.13; Yt12.32.
6. Yt10.143.
7. Y19.9.
8. Yt19.46.
9. Y22.24; 25.5.
10. Yt15.5, 42, 57, 58; S1.21; 2.11.
11. Yt19.43, 44.
12. Yt13.12, 13.
13. Yt15.2, 3. The superlative forms, Spentotema Mainyu,14 or Spenishta
Mainyu, meaning the Most Holy Spirit; are spoken of as Ahura Mazda's
attributes.15
14. Y1.1; 37.3.
15. Y19.1; Yt1.1; 14.1, 34, 42; Vd2.1; 7.1; 9.1; 10.1; 14.1; 18.14; A4.4. [162]
CHAPTER XXI
AMESHA SPENTAS
The archangels. The higher celestial beings that had not expressly acquired
a distinguishing name of their own in the Gathas are now designated as the
Amesha Spentas, or 'Holy Immortal Ones.' They are thus addressed for the

first time in the Haptanghaiti, or the Yasna of Seven Chapters, the earliest
prose composition of the Avestan period, though still made in the Gathic
dialect.1 They are all created by Ahura Mazda.2 Plutarch and Strabo refer to
them in their works.3 With the godhead at the pinnacle they form a heptad
and are henceforth mentioned as the seven Holy Immortal Ones.4 Severally
they are both male and female.5 Vohu Manah, Asha Vahishta, and Khshathra
Vairya are conceived of as masculine beings, though neuter in grammatical
gender; Spenta Armaiti is pictured as a feminine concept; and Haurvatat and
Ameretat are treated as masculine beings, though their grammatical gender is
feminine. In a paramount degree they are all of one thought, one word, and
one deed; their father and lord is the creator Ahura Mazda.6 They look into
one another's soul;7 and they each have their special Fravashi.8 Garonmana
[garothman], the highest heaven, is their dwelling-place, and there they
occupy the golden seats that belong to spirits in the realm supernal.9 Their
sacred names are the most mighty, most glorious, and the most victorious of
the spells.10 To utter their name is synonymous with efficacy and power.
Yasht 2 is devoted to their praise.
1. Y39.3; 42.6.
2. Yt1.25.
3. Is. et Os. 47; Strabo, p. 732; Thomas, Strabo and the Ameshaspands in J. J.
Madressa Jubilee Volume, p. 173-176.
4. Yt2.13; 13.83; 19.16; For seven Babylonian Igigis and seven Elamite
deities, see Gray, The Foundations of the Iranian Religions, p. 17.
5. Y4.4; 24.9; 39.3; Vr9.4.
6. Yt13.83; 19.16.
7. Yt13.84; 19.17.
8. Y23.2.

9. Vd19.32, 36.
10. Yt1.3. [163] Their attributes. The Amesha Spentas are the ever-living
and the ever-helping ones;11 they are the wise ones, and good rulers.12 It is
they that are the shining ones; of efficacious eyes, exalted, mighty, valiant,
imperishable, and righteous.l2 They are the makers, rulers, fashioners,
guardians, protectors, and preservers of the creation of Mazda,14 and Mazda
has given them beautiful forms.15
11. Y4.4; 39.3; Vr9.4; 11.12.
12. Y2.2; 4.4; 6.1; 24.9; 25.4; 35.1; 58.5; 70.1; Vr8.1; 11.12; Vd19.9.
13. Y26.3; Yt13.82.
14. Y58.5; Yt19.18; Vd19.9.
15. Yt13.81. Their work. The archangels hold their celestial councils on the
heights of the heavens.16 From there they come down to the seven zones
into which the world was divided according to the Avesta,17 and rule over
the realms of earth.18 They are naturally invited to the sacrifice,19 and
offerings are placed by the devout for them to accept.20 The faithful pray
that the Amesha Spentas may visit and enjoy sacrifices in their houses,21 for
shining is the path by which they descend to earth to receive the libations
offered in their honour.22 Even Mithra as a God-like embodiment sacrificed
unto them,23 and for him they have made a dwelling.24 They are of one
accord with the sun;25 and they gather together the light of the moon and
pour it down upon the earth.26 They are the divine ones who help in
bringing about the final restoration of the world.27 Each of them will smite
his opponent at the time of the resurrection.28
16. G2.8.
17. Y57.23; Yt11.14.
18. Vd19.13.

19. Y1.2.
20. Y4.2.
21. Y60.6.
22. Yt13.84; 19.17.
23. Yt10.89.
24. Yt10.51.
25. Yt10.5l; l3.92.
26. Yt7.3.
27. Yt19.19.
28. Yt19.96.
Zarathushtra the first among mortals to sacrifice unto the Amesha Spentas.
Mazda asks his prophet to invoke the Amesha Spentas, even though he
could not behold them with his eyes.29 Zarathushtra follows Mazda's
behests; and he is the first man to invoke them.30 a spiritual predecessor
having been Sraosha. For that reason the faithful sacrifice unto the Amesha
Spentas with love and joy,31 and pray to them for help and protection.32
Their praise and sacrifice form one of the cardinal articles of [164] faith.33
Hence it is that we find in the oft-repeated formulas of the Later Avestan
texts that sacrifice, invocation, propitiation, and glorification are offered to
them for the furtherance of prosperity in the world of righteousness.34 Nor
must it be forgotten that in his benedictions upon King Vishtaspa the
prophet invokes upon his royal patron the blessings of brightness, glory,
riches, swift horses, and good sons that come as a benign gift from the
archangels.35 The ceremonials performed in honour of the Amesha Spentas
by unholy priests delight them not;38 on the other hand, distress and harm

flee from that worshipper whose homage has reached them.37 When their
loving votary performs his devotions and finds his spirit inflamed by their
love, he forthwith dedicates to them the very life of his body and all his
earthly possessions.38
29. Vd19.13.
30. Yt17.18.
31. Y15.1; Vr6.1.
32. Y58.5.
33. Y12.1.
34. Y52.4.
35. Yt24.46.
36. Yt10.139; 24.12.
37. Yt1.24.
38. Y11.18; 14.1, 2; Vr5.2.
VOHU MANAH
His place in the Later Avesta. As the first in the creation of Ahura Mazda,
Vohu Manah retains his pre-eminent position in the Later Avestan period.
He occupies his seat next to Ahura Mazda in the celestial council. The other
archangels live in him.39 In some cases Vohu Manah does not stand as the
name of the archangel, but simply connotes its ordinary meaning good mind
or thought. In fact, as in the Gathas, there is a subtlety of meaning that
makes it difficult to decide in translation whether the concept or the
archangel is intended. In Vd19.20, 23-25 the term designates a good man or
even clean clothes.

39. Y4.4; Vr11.12. Vohu Manah guards wisdom. Vohu Manah's khratu, or
wisdom, which occurs in the Gathas, is now classified in the later texts into
two distinct types, âsna khratu, 'innate wisdom,' and gaoshosruta khratu,
'acquired wisdom.' These two types of knowledge are spoken of as objects
worthy of sacrifice and propitiation.40 Ahura Mazda accordingly asks
Zarathushtra to seek knowledge all the night long,41 because the true priest
and [165] his disciples work by day and by night for the increase of
knowledge.42 Vohu Manah rejoices in man's endeavour to wrest from nature
her secrets.
40. Y22.25; 25.6; Yt2.1; S1.2, 29; 2.2, 29.
41. Yt24.41.
42. Vd4.45; 18.6. His Work. When the Evil Spirit first attacked creation
Vohu Manah came to its succour.43 Zarathushtra asks Ahura Mazda to teach
him the laws of both the worlds, so that men following his precepts may act
in such a way that Vohu Manah may come to them.44 It is through his
medium that the devout can aspire to reach Ahura Mazda;45 and on that
account he is implored to further bodily life.46 It is said, moreover, that he is
more a possession of the hard-working man of the world, who has married
and toils for his family, than of the celibate or the ascetic.47 Vohu Manah's
function of guarding the animal kingdom is not emphasized in the Avestan
texts. 43. Yt13.77, 78.
44. Yt1.20.
45. Yt36.4.
46. Y68.23.
47. Vd4.48. Vohu Manah welcomes the righteous souls to paradise. When
the blessed ones cross the great bridge and come up to the gates of heaven,
this premier angel rises from his golden throne and in gracious words
receives the new-comers.48 48. Vd19.31. In the final conflict between the
hosts of the rival powers, he will smite his adversary Aka Manah.48a

48a. Yt19.96.
ASHA VAHISHTA
The formation of the name. The Younger Avesta, in conformity with the
Gathas, calls this archangel Asha and adds the epithet vahishta or 'best' to the
name. The variant stem arta is, however, found as an element of Astvatereta,
the name of the renovator [soshyant].49 It is also met with in the proper
names during the Achaemenian period. We have, for example,
Artakhshathra, Artadata, Artapata, and Artafarnah. Its forms areta, 'proper,'
and anareta or anaretha, 'improper,' are likewise found.50 A righteous person is
called ashavan which is equivalent to the [166] Vedic rtâvan. In the use of
Avestan ashahe khâ and Vedic khâ rtasya, 'source of righteousness,' we have an
interesting instance of the common words employed by both.51
49. Yt13.110, 117, 128, 129; 19.92, 95.
50. Y12.4; 65.9; Vr1.2; 2.2.
51. Y10.4; RV2.28.5. His righteousness remains the basic doctrine of
Zoroastrianism during the Later Avestan period. Ahura Mazda is the
righteous lord of righteousness.52 Among the many names by which Ahura
Mazda is invoked in the hymn dedicated to him, the fourth is Asha Vahishta
or Best Righteousness.53 Ahura Mazda has created Asha Vahishta, or Best
Righteousness,54 who is the greatest, best, fairest, the radiant, the all-good
archangel.55 In one instance he is called by the Indo-Iranian epithet bagha,
'divinity.' He it is who smites disease, death, fiends, sorcerers, noxious
creatures, and his adversary Druj, Deceit or Wickedness.56 Zarathushtra for
that reason proclaims the glory of Asha Vahishta, through whom the way to
the abode of the archangels, paradise, becomes easy.57 The souls of the dead,
who are the Fravashis of the righteous, dwell in the shining realm of Asha
Vahishta.58 This celestial personification gives joy to the souls of the
righteous dead.59 It is through him that the devotee aspires to behold and
reach Ahura Mazda.60 He offers homage and adoration to him along with
Ahura Mazda.61 Emphasizing Zarathushtra's dictum in the Gathas, the
Younger Avesta affirms that there is one path alone that leads to the eternal

life, and that is the Path of Righteousness.62 The Vedas likewise allude to the
Path of Rta.63 The Achaemenian kings refer to the Right Path in their rock
inscriptions.64 Buddha embodies his teachings in his noble Eightfold Path.65
During the same period Lao-tze interprets his philosophy in the Tao or the
Way in China. Shinto or the Way of the gods appears in the national cult of
Japan. The prophets and seers reveal the Path or Way of life to mankind and
Jesus calls himself the Way, a thousand years after Zarathushtra. The faithful
invoke the holy waters of Ahura Mazda for the attainment of this path which
is the most upright and which leads to the paradise of [167] the righteous.66
Atar, the genius of fire, leads to this straightest path all those who lie not
unto Mithra.67 Referring to the guilty persons who have undergone
punishments for the crime of assaulting other persons, the Vendidad68
admonishes sinners to walk in the path of righteousness in future. Darius
likewise exhorts men not to leave the path which is right.69 52. G5.5.
53. Yt1.7.
54. Yt1.25.
55. Y13.8; 37.4; 59.32; 60.13; Yt1.22; 2.7; 13.91, 92; S1.3; 2.3.
56. Yt3.14-17.
57. Yt3.3.
58. Y16.7.
59. TdFr. 72-74.
60. Y60.12.
61. Y41.1.
62. Y72.11
63. RV1.136.

64. Naksh-i Rustam a. 6.
65. Mahâvagga, 1.6.18.
66. Y68.13.
67. Yt10.3.
68. NR. a. 6. Zarathushtra was the first among mortais to praise this
embodiment of holiness;70 and King Vishtaspa, by adopting the new faith,
helped to open the way for righteousness in this world.71 The faithful
beseech Ahura Mazda to bless them with intelligent men who embrace
righteousness;72 Good, thoughts of the mind, good words of the tongue, and
good deeds of the hand make man ashavan, or righteous.73 He obtains purity
when he cleanses his own self with them.74 The friendship of Asha in this
world and the next is the most coveted boon for all time.75 It is easy to
understand why Asha is invoked to enter the house of the faithful to smite
the wicked Druj.76 The excellence of religious thoughts, words, and deeds,
which is ordained by Ahura Mazda, and nourished by Vohu Manah, is
furnished by the righteousness of Asha Vahishta.77
70. Yt13.88.
71. Yt13.99; 19.93.
72. Y40.3.
73. TdFr. 57-59; see Nariman, Buddhist parallels to Humata, Hukhta, Hvarashta in
Dastur Hoshang Memorial Volume, p. 311-316.
74 Vd10.19.
75. Y40.2; 41.6.
76. Y60.5.

77. Vr12.3, 4.
Righteousness is the highest riches. Man, we are told, pines for the riches of
the earth and often strives to obtain the boon of wealth even by unlawful
means. On the contrary, he should rather aspire to a store of righteousness,
which is the real and permanent wealth. When a man starts on a journey, he
takes provisions and stores with him.78 He takes care to provide himself with
more goods than are his actual requirements.79 How sad it is, then, that he
should not furnish himself now, while it is time, with the spiritual stores of
righteousness for the great journey which he will have one day to undertake
and from which he will never return.80 In the end cattle are dust; gold and
silver are dross; even the body of man mingles with clay. Righteousness
alone does not mingle with the dust, but survives the bodily death of man.81
There comes a day or there comes a [168] night, when the master leaves his
cattle, when the cattle leave their master, and the soul leaves the body.82 But
righteousness, which is the greatest and the best of all riches, accompanies
the soul after death.83 Riches and fortune one cannot have for oneself, nor
can one maintain form and beauty of body forever at will; but everyone can
embrace righteousness and make it his own in this world.84 The best man is
the righteous man. He is not heroic who is not heroic in righteousness, he is
not valiant who is not valiant in righteousness.85 Life in departing leaves the
richest empty in the midst of his abundance, if he lacks righteousness.
78. Aog. 41.
79. Aog. 42-44.
80. Aog. 46-47.
81. Aog. 84.
82. Aog. 51.
83. Aog. 52.

84. TdFr. 95-98.
85. TdFr. 103, 104.
The world of righteousness, as against the world of wickedness. The
universe is divided into two hostile camps. The righteous form a distinct
world by themselves, and they are the favourite ones of Ahura Mazda. The
men who have chosen to naturalize themselves as citizens of the Kingdom of
Wickedness form a separate world of their own. The texts in the Later
Avesta speak of the ashaono sti, 'the world of the righteous man,' as opposed
to the drvato sti, 'the world of the wicked fiend,' The sorcerers and the wicked
destroy the world of righteousness.86 It is the faithful that work for the
furtherance of the one, and for the destruction of the other.87 The man that
is holy rejoices in the prosperity of the former, just as he exults in the
adversity of the latter.88 He who does not gladden a righteous person who
comes within his gates has no lasting or true joy. To be charitable to such a
one is to attain paradise.89 But again, he rejoices not who helps a wicked
person that clamours for help. To help such an evil one is equivalent to
hindering righteousness, inasmuch as he is wicked who is a source of
goodness to the wicked.90 A gift bestowed upon a righteous man is the best
of all libations,91 but not so when it is made to a wicked one. Refusing food
to a demon-worshipper or a wicked one does not make one guilty.92 The
faithful pray that a righteous king may rule over them, but that a wicked one
may be baffled and defeated.93
86. Y8.3.
87. Y52.4.
88. Y8.8.
89. TdFr. 107-109.
90. Y71.13; TdFr. 110-112.
91. N84.

92. N18.
93. Y8.6. [169] Bodily purity contributes to righteousness. Next to life the
second best good for man is purity.94 This is the dictum of the Gathas, and it
is most consistently developed throughout the entire subsequent literature. It
is the favourite theme on which, the Zoroastrian theologians are never tired
of expatiating. Purity of body is the most salient feature in the life of a
Zoroastrian. It is rated higher than anything else. The problem of cleanness
and uncleanness, purity and impurity, has evoked an extensive literature. The
tenets of the faith in this respect have been worked out into a science of
health. Bodily purity is indispensable to purity of mind. Cleanliness of body
is an essential requisite for saintliness. The clean in body find it easy to be
pure in mind, and the pure in heart have just a step to take to be holy in
spirit.
Asha Vahishta comes to be regarded as the healing spirit of bodily
diseases. As the many kinds of healers restore bodily health by herbs and
drugs, and remove the tumours and cancers by knife and implements, so
there are healers that heal through righteousness or by the holy spell. We
shall speak later on, in its proper place, of the art of healing by means of the
holy spell. The Yasht which receives its name after Asha Vahishta is in fact
mostly consecrated to Asha Vahishta's associate Airyaman, the guardian
genius of human health. Of all the healers, the Avestan texts announce, the
spiritual healer is the best one; it is he that heals the faithful through his own
righteousness by means of the utterance of the holy spell.95
95. Yt3.6; Vd7.44. Asha Vahishta's relation to fire. We have seen in the
Gathas Asha's dual association with the universal order prevailing
everywhere and fire. We find these early Zoroastrian conceptions reflected
in the writings of the Greek philosophers of the period. Heraclitus, who
flourished at Ephesus, near the end of the sixth century B.C., postulates fire
as the first principle from which everything that exists has come. It is
working as reason or Logos and reveals the stable, divine law in the eternal
flow of things in the universe. Heraclitus left a deep impression on Greek
philosophy and his conceptions appear in later thinkers.96

96. See also Carnoy, Zoroastrianism in ERE 12. 866. In the Avestan liturgy
Asha Vahishta is invoked together [170] with Atar; the genius of fire.97
Angra Mainyu, as the devil, exclaims that Zarathushtra burns him with Asha
Vahishta as with molten metal.98 This allegory of burning and annihilating
the Evil Spirit through righteousness is taken literally in the later period of
Zoroastrianism, Where Asha Vahishta is identified at times with the
household fire on the hearth. Such identification in the realms of matter and
of spirit serves only to bring more into prominence the main tenets of
Zoroaster's teachings in regard to Asha.
97. Yl.4; 2.4; 3.6; 4.9; 6.3; 7.6, 17.3; 22.6; 59.3; Yt4.9; Sr1.7; 2.7; Afr. 4.2;
G.2, 9, 12.
98. Yt17.20.
KHSHATHRA VAIRYA
The change that the concept undergoes. The Gathic Khshathra now takes
Vairya, 'desirable,' as its standing epithet, and hence both the terms combine
to form the name of this archangel. This archangel of Ahura Mazda99
gradually loses the abstract side of his nature in the Avestan texts. In the
Gathic prose text of the Yasna Haptanghaiti the abstract idea of the Divine
Kingdom occurs but once. In this solitary passage the devout long for the
everlasting Kingdom of Ahura Mazda.100 Throughout the Younger Avestan
texts this abstract idea of the spiritual kingdom recedes into the background,
or rather is entirely lost sight of. True, Khshathra Vairya is still occasionally
invoked by name along with the other celestial beings, but his higher
function as the genius of the sovereign power in the abstract entirely falls
out.
99. Yt1.25.
100. Y41.2. Khshathra Vairya as the genius of earthly wealth. Materially
Khshathra Vairya is the genius of metal, and his activity is now limited to
guarding this concrete creation of God. He is not spoken of as the genius of
the celestial riches of the Divine Kingdom of Ahura Mazda. Khshathra

Vairya and the molten metal are invoked side by side.101 In fact he very soon
loses even this trait of his work; he is identified with metal and just becomes
metal itself.102 Thrita, the first reputed healer [171] of the bodies of mortals,
received from him a surgical instrument for healing.103 101. Vr20.1; Yt2.7;
Sr1.4; 2.4.
102. Yt10.125; Vd9.10; 16.6; 17.6, 8.
103. Vd20.3. As the genius of metal, Khshathra Vairya is the lord of earthly
riches. He generously bestows his possessions on the poor. He is sometimes
invoked in company of marezhdika, 'mercy,'104 who is styled the protector of
the poor. We can trace this relation of Khshathra Vairya as the merciful
helper of the poor to the Ahuna Vairya [Ahunwar] formula.
104. Yt2.7; Sr1.4; 2.4.
SPENTA ARMAlTI
Her position in the Avesta. As devotion personified on the abstract side,
and as the genius of the earth on the concrete side, Spenta Armaiti, 'Holy
Devotion,' retains her dual nature in the Younger Avesta. Through the
medium of Devotion the faithful aspire to approach Ahura Mazda,105 and in
the Confession of Faith the pious follower of Zarathushtra chooses
Devotion, and yearns to make her his own.106 Upon lifting up his devotional
prayer the house-lord prays that she may enter his house and thus rout
heresy.107 The malice and harm of the wicked could be averted through her
help.l08 She is the daughter of Ahura Mazda and as the genius of devotion is
the mother of Ashi Vanghulti, or the genius of Good Piety,109 while Rata, the
guardian spirit of generosity, is invoked with her.110
105. Y13.6; 39, 5.
106. Y12.2.
107. Y60.5.
108. Yt1.28.

109. Yt17.16; Vd19.13, 16.
110. Sr1.5; 2.5. Armaiti as earth. From her position as the female genius of
the earth,111 Armaiti very soon becomes the earth herself. She is now more
frequently spoken of as the earth than as the genius of the earth.112 She wears
the star-studded sky as her garment.113
111. Vd3.35.
112. Y16.10; Yt24.50; Vd2.10, 14, 18; 18.51, 64.
HAURVATAT AND AMERETAT
The dual archangels. These two Amesha Spentas are closely united to each
other and generally occur together side by side.114 Haurvatat has a Yasht
consecrated to him, being invoked as the [172] lord of seasons and years.115
Ahura Mazda created Haurvatat for the help, joy, comfort, and pleasure of
the righteous ones.116 The man who invokes the name of Haurvatat as one of
the archangels is able to smite the legion of demons.117 The two, Haurvatat
and Ameretat, together form the reward of the righteous after death,118 while
fire is invoked to grant the blessings of Haurvatat and Ameretat to its
supplicants for help and joy.119 The two archangels together will smite the
demons of hunger and thirst during the final conflict between the forces of
good and evil.120 113. Yt13.3.
114. Y1.2; 3.1; 4.1; 6.17; 7.26; 8.1; 58.7; 70.2; 11.12; Vr9.5; Yt1.15; 10.92.
115. Yt4.0; S1.6; 2.6.
116. Yt4.1.
117. Yt4.2.
118. Yt1.25.
119. Y58.7.

120. Yt19.96.
Instances where the two archangels materially personify water and plants are
not found in the Later Avestan texts. Examples, however, are not wanting, as
is well known, in which they occur as meaning specifically water and plants
in their healing effect on mankind.121
121. Y3.1; 4.1, 3; 7.1, 20; 8.1. [173]
CHAPTER XXII
YAZATAS
The Zoroastrian angels. Next in rank to the Amesha Spentas come the
Yazatas, literally meaning the 'adorable ones.' We find the corresponding
Skt. word Yajata in the Rig Veda, but it does not play any conspicuous part
there. If the Amesha Spentas are the archangels in Zoroastrian theology, the
Yazatas are the angels. They are numbered by hundreds and by thousands,1
by tens of thousands and by hundreds of thousands, nay even more.2 About
forty only, however, are mentioned in the extant Avestan text. Plutarch
refers to twenty-four.3 The prominent Yazatas mentioned by name in Y16.46; Sr1.8-30; 2.8-30, closely correspond to the number mentioned by the
Greek writer. Several of the Yazatas have individually consecrated to them a
Yasht, or hymn of praise, which narrates the doings and functions of its
respective genius. Besides the Yashts that form a special biographical
literature of these minor divinities, the whole Iranian literature is filled with
the record of their achievements. Ahura Mazda himself is a Yazata,4 even as
he is an Amesha Spenta. He is the greatest and the best Yazata.5
Zarathushtra himself is spoken of as a Yazata.6
1. Yt6.1.
2. Vr8.1; for a list of minor divinities see Gray, The Foundations of the Iranian
Religions, p, 221-224.
3. Is et Os., 47.

4. Y41.3
5. Y16.1; Yt17.16.
6. Y3.21; 7.21. History of the Yazatas. Some of these Yazatas are, as we
have already seen, pre-Zoroastrian and go back to the Indo-Iraniam period;
but with the exception of Sraosha, Atar, and Ashi, they do not appear in the
Gathas, though frequent enough in the Later Avesta. In fact, they permeate
all the later texts, and form an indissoluble part of the Zoroastrian pantheon.
We shall group them under two headings and distinguish those that are
common to the Indians and the Iranians from those that are purely Iranian.
[174] Indo-lranian: Mithra, Airyaman, Haoma, Verethraghna, Parendi, Rata,
Nairyosangha, Apam Napat, Ushah, and Vayu.
Iranian: Atar, Ardvi Sura Anahita, Hvarekhshaeta, Maonghah, Tishtrya
Drvaspa, Sraosha, Rashnu, Raman, Daena, Chisti, Erethe, Rasanstat, Ashi
Vanghuhi, Arshtat, Asman, Zam, Manthra Spenta, Damoish Upamana, and
Anaghra Raochah.
Characteristics of the Yazatas. Like their celestial elders, the Amesha
Spentas, the Yazatas impersonate abstract ideas and virtues, or concrete
objects of nature. Many of them preside over both spiritual and material
phenomena. The nature Yazatas Hvarekhshaeta, Mithra, Maonghah, Ardvi
Sura, Atar, and others personify the sun, light, moon, water, and fire. At
times their names designate merely the objects of nature that they personify.
This simultaneous treatment of the dual aspect of these angels is frequently
found in one and the same paragraph and makes it difficult to distinguish the
actual impersonations from the personified objects. Very often praise and
sacrifice are offered more to the sun, light, moon, water, and fire as such than
to the Yazatas presiding over them. We learn from Herodotus that the
Persians sacrificed unto the sun, moon, earth, fire, water, and winds.7 7.
Herod. 1.131. Instances are not wanting in which a Yazata begins his career
as the personification of some one particular virtue or an object of nature,
but with the lapse of time either substitutes for it some other or widens his
sphere of activity and takes some new virtue in the abstract or some new

object of nature under his guardianship in addition to his original duty. Some
of the Yazatas are lacking in real individuality.
The functions of the Yazatas. Various are the boons that the Yazatas give
unto man.8 By hundreds and by thousands they gather together the light of
the sun and pour it upon the earth.9 Men invoke them with sacrifices10 and in
return they help men, They have a share of invocation and sacrifice offered
unto Ahura Mazda, who is not jealous of the oblations thus dedicated to his
subordinates. They are the holy, mighty, beneficent ones,11 full of glory and
healing.12 Apart from the [175] general work which the Yazatas perform as a
class of spiritual beings, they are severally allotted different functions, which
we shall notice under their respective headings.
8. Y65.12, 14.
9. Yt6.1; Ny1.11
10. Yt8.11.
11. Y25.8; 65.12, 14; G2.6.
12. Ny3.11. Offerings and sacrifices to the Yazatas. Libations of milk and
Haoma, of the Draonah [dron], or wafer-bread, and of meat are the objects
generally dedicated to the angels, who always demand that man shall not
forget their invocation and praise. They are ever eager to protect and help
man in peace or war, provided that man propitiates them with offerings and
sacrifices. To Anahita as celestial guardian of the waters, to Drvaspa, who
protects cattle, and to Vayu, the wind, a hundred horses, a thousand oxen,
and ten thousand sheep are consecrated in sacrifice by some of the early
kings and heroes. We shall turn to this subject later.
Division of the Yazatas according to their grammatical gender. The
Yazatas are both males and females, or rather the personifications of virtues
and ideas that are in gender masculine and feminine. There is no distinction
between these male and female divinities. Both of them are on the same
level, occupy the same place of honour, and receive the same amount of
homage. The gentle work becoming to the fair sex is allotted to female

angels, and they are as powerful and awe-inspiring in their own sphere of
activity as their fellow-workers of the opposite sex are in theirs. The female
angels are: Ushah, Zam, Ardvi Sura Anahita, Drvaspa, Daena, Chisti,
Arshtat, Erethe, Rasanstat Ashi Vanghuhi, Parendi, and Rata. All others are
the male sex.
Group Yazatas. The usual manner of sacrificing unto the angels is to invoke
each one separately by his name, or in company of his comrades and coworkers, or in joint pairs. On this last point we shall speak anon under a
separate heading. Sometimes all the angels are invoked in a group under the
comprehensive title of vispe Yazata, "all Yazatas,"13 Closely corresponding to
the Vedic vishve Devâh, 'all Divinities.' In fact an entire book of the ritual is
dedicated to the various spiritual lords under the title Visperad, literally
meaning 'all lords.'
13. Y1.19; 2.18; Yt11.17; 17.19; WFr. 5.1. Dual Yazatas. A particular feature
common to the Avestan and Vedic religions is the arrangement of certain
divinities in pairs, who are revered together. As some of the Yazatas guard
more than one abstract virtue or impersonate more than one [176] natural
phenomenon, it is not uncommon to find one Yazata entering into
partnership with various Yazatas according to the nature of his work. For
instance, Mithra, as the sovereign lord of wide pastures, forms a pair with
Ahura; as the lord of light, he works in consort with Hvarekhshaeta, the
genius of light; as the lord of truth, he works in company with Rashnu; and
as the lord of plenty and prosperity, he enters into a comradeship with
Raman. The more prominent of the dual divinities are Ahura-Mithra,14
Hvarekhshaeta-Mithra,15 Mithra-Rashnu,16 Mithra-Raman,17 RashnuArshtat,18 Raman-Vayu,19 Daena-Chisti,20 Ashi Vanghuhi-Parendi,21 and
Asman-Zamyat.22 Sometimes a special attribute of one Yazata is extended to
his associate, and they share the characteristic qualities and functions of each
other.
14. Y1.11; 2.11; Ny1.7; 2.12; Yt10.113, 145.
15. Yt6; Ny1.2.
16. Vr7.2; Yt13.47, 48; 14.47; 24.52; Vd4.54.

17. Y2.3; 25.4; Vr2.9; Vd3.1; G1.2, 7, 8; S1.16, 2.16.
18. Y1.7; 2.7; Yt10.139; 12.40, S1.18; 2.18.
19. Y16.5; S1.21; 2.21.
20. Ny1.8; 2.8; S1.24; 2.24.
21. Y13.1; Yt8.38; 10.66; 24.8; S1.25; 2.25.
22. Yt1.16; 16.6; 42.3. Classification of the Yazatas. The Avestan texts
generally speak of two distinct orders of the Yazatas. They are mainyava,
'spiritual or celestial,' and gaethya, 'material or terrestrial.'23 We are not,
however, informed what particular Yazatas are grouped under each of the
two classes. A very recent gloss in the Pahlavi version of the Avestan Litany
Khurshid Niyayesh explains that the terrestrial angels are such as Fire, Ardvi
Sura's Waters, the Wind, the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth. These are so
called, adds the commentator, because they can be seen by man with his
eyes, whereas the celestial ones cannot thus be seen.24 23. Y1.19; 3.4; 7.4;
16.9; 22.27; 25.8; 71.5; Yt6.3, 4; 10.13; 19.22; S1.30; 2.30; Ny1.9; G2.6;
Vd2.21; 19.30; WFr. 1.2.
24. Cf. Dhalla, Nyaishes, p. 35, New York, 1908. In the following tabulation
we shall class the Yazatas under two main divisions. Those Yazatas who
commonly work for one and the same virtue, or preside over some one
particular phenomenon, will be classed under the sub-titles of such a virtue
or a phenomenon common to them. Thus, for example, all the Yazatas that
guard rectitude will be treated in one group, and those that preside over
1ight will be dealt with together. In cases [177] where a Yazata presides over
more than one virtue, we shall class this particular angel under the most
prominent and characteristic of his virtues.
CELESTIAL YAZATAS
•

Divine wisdom: Daena, Chisti, and Sraosha.

•

Rectitude: Mithra, Rashnu, Arshtat, Erethe, and Rasanstat.

•

Victory: Verethraghna.

•

Felicity: Raman.

•

Charity: Rata.

•

Peace: Akhshti.

•

Spell : Manthra Spenta, Dahma Afriti, Damoish Upamana.

•

Health: Airyaman, Haoma.

•

Riches: Ashi Vanghuhi, Parendi.

•

Cattle: Drvaspa, Geush Urvan.

TERRESTRIAL YAZATAS
•

Light: Hvarekhshaeta, Maonghah, Anaghra Raochah, Asman, Ushah;
(star-Yazatas) Tishtrya, Vanant, Satavaesa, and Haptoiringa.

•

Wind: Vayu.

•

Fire: Atar, Nairyosangha.

•

Water: Ardvi Sura Anahita, Apam Napat, and Ahurani

•

Earth: Zam.

DAENA
Religion deified. One of the least personified Yazatas is Daena, even though
she is a female divinity of religion. Very little is known of her personality
more than the fact that she is the genius of the Holy Law of Mazda. She has
a Yasht assigned to her which is called after her name; and yet even this is
entirely consecrated to Chisti, who is her usual associate. The offerings are
made to her companion, and various boons are asked from her. Daena has no
share in this. She is simply mentioned by name in invocation along with
Chisti. Even here she is assigned a secondary place, for Chisti takes

precedence over her. Throughout the Avestan texts in which the two are
mentioned together, Daena stands second in the order of invocation.25 Ashi
[178] Vanghuhi, or Good Piety, is her sister and Sraosha, Rashnu, and
Mithra are her brothers.26 The twenty-fourth day of every month is
dedicated to her.27
25. Y22.24; 25.5; S1.24; 2.24; Ny1.8; 2.8.
26. Yt17.15, 17. The names of the religion. It is called the daena vanghu
Mazdayasnya, 'the good Mazda-worshipping religion,'28 or daena Mazdayasna,
'the Mazda-worshipping religion.'29 It is named conjointly with Ahura and
Zarathushtra and called Âhuirya Zarathushtri, 'the Ahurian Zarathushtrian.'30 It
is further named dâta Zarathushtri, 'the Law of Zarathushtra.31 It is also spoken
of without associating it with Ahura Mazda or Zarathushtra as hu-daena,
'good religion.'32 The religion in standing opposition to the Mazdawotshipping religion is always called daevayasnya, 'the daeva-worshipping
religion.' The preliminary short prayers, the Gahs, the Niyayeshes, the
Yashts generally begin with a short confessionary formula in which the
reciter says he is the worshipper of Mazda, a Zarathushtrian, he is against the
daevas, and he is of Ahurian faith, Ahura-tkaesho. One of the Nasks, the
Vendidad in its original form, vi-daeva-dâta, means 'the Law against the daevas
or demons'.33 This religion of the demons is called aka-daena, 'evil religion';34
or duzh-daena, 'evil religion.'35 The man who follows the same religion is
hâmo-daena, 'the co-religionist.'36 The man of other religion is of anya-tkaesha
or anya-varena.37
27. Y16.6; S1.24; 2.24.
28. Y1.13; 2.13; 9.26; 11.16; 16.6; 22.24, 25; 25.5, 6; 70.3; Vr6.1; Yt2.13;
16.20; S1.24; 2.24; Ny1.8; 2.8; Vd19.6, 7, 13, 16.
29. Y8.1, 3; 22.25; 25.6; 71.4; Vr12.3; Yt8.23, 29; 10.68, 126, 127; 11.3;
16.17; 18.8; 19.2; 24.52; G2.7; Vd2.42; 3.30, 31, 41, 42; 5.21; 9.2, 47, 52;
10.18.
30. Y12.9; 60.3; Yt13.99; Vd2.1, 2.

31. Y1.13; 2.13; 22.25; 25.6; Yt11.3; Vd5.25; 19.16.
32. Vr3.3; Yt4.10; 19.95; 22.18; G4.8.
33. Y1.13; 2.13; 22.25; 25.6; 71.5; Yt11.17; Vd5.22; 19.16.
34. Vd18.9.
35. Y65.6; Yt5.109; 9.31; 19.47, 87; 22.36.
36. Vd4.44.
37. Y16.2; Vd12.21; 15.2. The excellence of the Mazda-worshipping
religion. The angel Sraosha is the teacher of the religion.38 Arshtat, the
genius presiding over rectitude, is once identified with Daena.39 Ahura
Mazda brought for Haoma the heavenly made star-bespangled [179] girdle
and the good Mazda-worshipping religion.40 He asked Yima to be the bearer
of his religion to mankind, but the illustrious king plead6d his inability to
undertake such a mighty task.41 Zarathushtra then became the prophet of
Ahura Mazda, and brought his religion to the world. The Kingly Glory clave
unto king Vishtaspa and he thought and spoke and acted according to the
religion.42 He became the arm and support of the Ahurian Zoroastrian religion.43 He found her fettered in chains and
made her widely known.44
38. Y57.24; Yt11.24.
39. Vr7.2.
40. Y9.26.
41. Vd2.3, 4.
42. Yt19.84.
43. Yt13.99.
44. Yt13.100. The Ahurian Zoroastrian religion, We are told, is the greatest,

best, and fairest of all religions that are and that will be.45 She is as much
higher in greatness, goodness, and fairness than others as the Vourukasha is
above all waters, or a great river, flowing swifter than a rivulet, or as a great
tree overshadowing small plants, or as the heaven compassing the earth.46
She is beautiful and spread far and wide.47 As dissensions-dispelling, she
causes weapons to be laid down.48 She rejoices, protects, and guards the
righteous man.49 She takes away the sins of those who confess their wrongs
and removes their evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds, as the powerfully
blowing wind cleanses the plain.50 The Mazdayasnian religion gives all good
things of life.51 She gives purification to him who cleanses his self with good
thoughts, good words, and good deeds.52 The place where the faithful pray
and sacrifice according to religion is happy.53 Hard work and industry are
prime Zoroastrian virtues. Agriculture is the staple industry of the people and
the texts say that sowing corn again and again feeds the Mazda-worshipping
religion, it makes her walk with a hundred men's feet and suckles her with a
thousand women's breasts.54 The householder prays for the long-enduring
excellence of the religion in his house.55 Priests going afar for the
propagation of religion, pray for a good memory and the soundness of the
body.56 He is not an athravan who has not girded his loins for religion.57 The
white colour, it is said is symbolic of the Mazda-worshipping religion.58
45. Y12.9.
46. Vd5.22-25.
47. Yt10.64.
48. Y12.9.
49. Yt24.14.
50. Vd3.41, 42.
51. Yt11.3.
52. Vd5.21; 10.18.

53. Vd3.1.
54. Vd3.30, 31.
55. Y60.3.
56. Yt16.16.
57. Vd18.1-4.
58. Yt10.126.
[180]
CHISTI
Divinity of religious wisdom. Unlike her partner, just mentioned, Chisti,
divinity of religious wisdom, has a personality that is sharply defined. Her
standing epithets are 'good' and 'most upright.' She is the most upright,
holy, bearing libations, wearing a white garment as her emblem.59
Zarathushtra longs to own her and devoutly implores her to grant him,
among other things, the clearest vision.60 The prophet's noble consort
Hvovi, as well as the itinerant priests and the lords of the country, are among
her supplicants, asking various boons, which she grants to those who are
pure in heart.61 The faithful long to approach Ahura Mazda through the
deeds of Chisti.62 59. Yt10.126.
60. Yt16.2-13.
61. Yt16.15, 17, 19.
62. Y36.4.
The word chisti is often used to denote spiritual wisdom. The eighth name of
Ahura Mazda is chisti or wisdom, and the ninth is 'possessed of wisdom.'63
The world first came into being through Ahura Mazda's understanding and

wisdom.64 Haoma makes the mind of the poor exalted with wisdom.65
63. Yt1.8, 9.
64. Yt1.26.
65. Y10.13.
SRAOSHA
His personality. Sraosha is one of the few angels whose prominence
increases with the lapse of time. Two Yashts are dedicated to him. The latter
of which occurs also in the Yasna. He is the angel whose name has reached
afar and whose very body is the holy spell.66 Sraosha occupied a conspicuous
place in the Gathas, and was associated with Ahura Mazda and his six
abstract figures that have now become a corporate body of the seven
Amesha Spentas. His close connection with them is remembered by the
composers of the Later Avestan texts. We are told that he was the first in the
entire creation to worship Ahura Mazda, the Amesha Spentas. and the two
protectors.67 He [181] chanted the five holy Gathas of Zarathushtra in order
to propitiate the archangels.68 From his battles against the demons, he
returns victorious to the celestial assembly of the archangels.69 His dwelling
is supported by a thousand pillars, is self-lighted from within, and starspangled from without.70 He drives forth in a heavenly chariot drawn by four
white shining horses that are fleeter than the winds, fleeter than the rain,
fleeter than the winged birds, and fleeter than the well-darted arrow.71 They
overtake all, but none can overtake them, when Sraosha drives towards
Hapta Hindu or the land of seven rivers in India.72 The sacred formula Ahuna
Vairya [Ahunwar] and the other consecrated spells are his weapons.73 His
sisters are Ashi and Daena, and his brothers are Rashnu and Mithra,74 and
unto him Haoma offered sacrifice.75 Owing to his victorious courage and
wisdom the archangels come down to the seven zones.76
66. Y3.20; 4.23; Yt13.85; Vd18.14.
67. Y57.2, 6.

68. Y57.8.
69. Y57.12.
70. Y57.21.
71. Y57.27, 28.
72. Y57.29.
73. Y57.22.
74. Yt17.l6.
75. Y57.19.
76. Y57.23
Sraosha's attributes. His standing epithets are: holy, well-shapen, victorious,
ad world-increasing. He is the strongest, the sturdiest, the most active, the
swiftest, and the most awe-inspiring of youths.77 He is the word incarnate,
the valiant wielder of the club, which is levelled against all demoniacal
powers, especially against the fiendish Druj.78 He is courageous, mighty,
swift, powerful, terrible, and heroic.79 He is a formidable foe to the wicked.
He is not afraid or anyone, but the demons tremble at his sight and flee to
the region of darkness.80 His mace does havoc on them. He is the warrior of
the strong arms, who breaks the skulls of the demons.81 Himself
unconquerable, he is the conqueror of all.
77. Y51.13.
78. Y3.20; 4.23; 57.1, 33; Yt11.0, 23; Sr1.17; Vd18.14.
79. Y57.3, 11, 12, 1:, 23. 80. Y57.18; Yt11.13.
81. Y57.34; Yt11.9. The work of Sraosha. Mazda has revealed his religion to

Sraosha, who now teaches it to the world of humanity.82 This was the prime
function, as we have seen above, that the Gathas allotted him. The Younger
Avestan texts speak more of his all-absorbing work of combating the
demons. In the Gathas he preached devout submission to Mazda's mandates;
in the Later Avesta he does the fighting with the rebels that revolt against
[182] divine authority. He, the exalted one, comes down to the creation of
Mazda, with loins girt up to fight the demons.83 Sleep has forsaken his
eyelids since the two spirits Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu created the
world.84 Ahura Mazda has created him to withstand the demon Aeshma.85
With an uplifted club he guards the world after sunset from the onslaughts of
Aeshma, his constant rival, and against all the forces of wickedness.86 Three
times during the day and three times during the night the holy Sraosha
descends on earth to smite the evil spirit Angra Mainyu, Aeshma, the
demons of Mazandaran, and all other demons.87 Just as the shepherd dog
guards and protects cattle against harm, so does Sraosha protect men; and
the faithful, therefore, yearn with good thoughts, good words, and good
deeds to live under his constant guardianship.88 The fire of the hearth calls
Sraosha for help in the third part of the night, for the demon Azi threatens
to extinguish his life.89 Sraosha, thereupon, wakes up the cock Parodarsh, his
ally, who lifts up his voice to rouse the world of humanity, and warns it
against the mischief of Bushyansta, who lulls it to sleep.90 With his terrible
mace levelled at the head of Druj, he enters into controversy with her,
extorts from the demoness her secret devices,91 and smites her.92 As the
teacher of religion unto men he moves about spreading religious lore at his
will over the whole material world.93 82. Y57.24; Yt11.14.
83. Y57.30.
84. Y57.17; Yt11.11, 12.
85. Yt11.15.
86. Y57.10, 16; Yt11.10, 11.
87. Y57.31, 32.

88. Yt11.7.
89. Vd18.22.
90. Vd18.23, 24.
91. Vd18.30-59.
92. Y57.15; Yt11.3, 10.
93. Y57.24. The master of rituals takes his name from Sraosha and is called
Sraoshâvarez.94 Parodarsh is called the Sraoshâvarez of Sraosha.95 The
implement of administering stripes to the criminals is called Sraoshocharana.96
94. Vr3.1; Yt24.15; Vd5.25, 57, 58; 7.17, 18, 71; G3.5.
95. Vd18.14, 15.
96. Vd3.36, 37; etc. Sraosha's gifts. He is implored to give strength to the
spans of the warriors' steeds in battle, soundness of body, and power to meet
the adversary.96a He is like a firmly built house unto the poor, who look to
him for support.97 The faithful entreat him to guard them in both the
worlds.98 The householder [183] invokes him to smite disobedience in his
family.99 He smites Kunda.100 The Mazdayasnians are asked to sacrifice unto
him.101 Evils of all kinds vanish from the house, clan, town, and country,
wherein the righteous man thinking good thoughts, speaking good words,
and doing good deeds, welcomes and sacrifices unto Sraosha.102 The faithful
pray for all the houses protected by Sraosha, wherein he is friendly, beloved,
and honoured.103 They beseech him to come to their help.104
96a. Y57.26.
97. Y51.10; Yt11.3.
98. Y57.25.

99. Y60.5.
100. Vd19.41.
101. Y57.13.
102. Y57.14.
103. Y57.35; Yt11.20.
104. Y57.3.
MITHRA
His place in the Avestan pantheon. Of all the Indo-Iranian divinities that
have found their place in the Zarathushtrian theology, Mithra is the most
prominent figure. As an associate of Varuna, Mithra's individuality was
eclipsed during the Indo-Iranian period. After the separation of these two
groups of the Aryan people, Mithra rose to great eminence, and was the
premier divinity in Western Iran, when Zarathushtra preached his religion.
During the period of syncretism after the passing away of the prophet,
Mithra became the most conspicuous angel of the Younger Avestan period.
The longest Yasht, which is eight times longer than the Yasht composed in
honour of Ahura Mazda, celebrates his greatness. He is the most masculine,
exacting, implacable, and relentless of all the Yazatas. Ahura Mazda has
created him the most glorious of the spiritual Yazatas,105 as worthy of
sacrifice and prayer as himself.106 The description of him in the Yasht that is
dedicated in his honour gives a vivid picture of the character of the preZarathushtrian divinities that came to be worshipped in Iran. Mithra was the
most eminent of the primitive Ahuras, as he was conjointly worshipped with
Ahura Mazda.107 The writer who consecrated Yasht 10 in his honour was
conversant with the past greatness of this divinity, whose cult had struck so
deep a root in the popular mind. He certainly was unsparing in eulogizing
the work of this genius in the universe. The texts sometimes speak of Mithra
in terms that are usually applied to Ahura Mazda, and the latter [184] himself
is represented in this particular Yasht as having sacrificed unto Mithra.108
The heptad of the Amesha Spentas having been already complete, Mithra is

not raised to the rank of these higher beings. but is assigned a place among
the Yazatas. The Old Persian Inscriptions of the Achaemenian kings mention
a very limited number of the celestial beings. Mithra occupies a prominent
place among these divinities. Artaxerxes Mnemon and Artaxerxes Ochus
invoke Mithra for help and protection.109
105. Vd19.35; Nyl.7.
106. Yt10.1.
107. Y1.11; 2.11; Yt10.113, 145; Ny1.7; 2.12.
108. Yt10.123.
109. SUS. a; Ham. b; Pers.4. Mithra's attributes. Of all the Yazatas that rule
over this earth, Mithra is the strongest, the most sturdy, the most active, the
most swift, and the most victorious.110 Ahura Mazda has created him the
most glorious of all the spiritual Yazatas.111 The composer of the Yasht who
sings to his favourite divinity applies to him the same honorific epithets as
are applied to the godhead. Mithra is called omniscient, which is strictly
speaking the epithet of Mazda alone.112 He is the greatest of the Yazatas,
with body shining like the moon, and face (ainika), as brilliant as Tishtrya.113
It is interesting to note that the Rig Veda uses the correspording Skt. form
(anika), and says that Varuna's face is as shining as that of Agni.114 He is the
strongest of the strong the sturdiest of the sturdy, the most intelligent among
the divinities, victorious, glorious, heroic, and the undeceivable one, deep,
courageous, weal-giving, propitiated when invoked, exalted, skilful, with a
body made of spells, and a warrior of powerful ,arms, the leader of hosts, of a
thousand devices, lordly, ruling, the all-knowing one, the one of good
renown, of good form and glory, granting boons and pastures at his will, the
giver of good, of ten thousand spies, heroic, and the all-knowing.115 He is
ever afoot, watchful, valiant, a dominating figure in the assembly, causing the
waters to flow, listening to appeals, causing the trees to grow, ruling over the
district full of devices, a creature of wisdom.116 He is the swiftest among the
swift, generous among the generous, valiant among the valiant, chief among
the chiefs [185] of assembly, increase-giving, fatness-giving, flock-giving,

son-giving, life-giving, felicity-giving, joy-giving, glory-giving, kingdomgiving, and piety-giving.117 Mithra is highly merciful, foremost, and
peerless.118 He is the protector and guardian of an creatures.119 He is the
most fiend-smiting among all the Yazatas.120 He is both good and bad for
men and nations, Peace and War between nations are from him.121 With his
wide knowledge, he furthers the creation of Spenta Mainyu.122 The sixteenth
day of a month and the seventh month of a year are sacred to Mithra.
110. Yt10.98, 135.
111. Yt19.35.
112. Yt10.24, 35.
113. Yt10.142, 143.
114. RV. 7.88, 2.
115. Yt10.24, 25, 27, 31, 35, 46, 56, 60, 63, 69, 82, 141, 143.
116. Yt10.61.
117. Yt10.16, 65.
118. Yt10.140.
119. Yt10.54.
120. Yt10.98, 135.
121. Yt10.29.
122. Yt10.142. Mithra's associates. Among those who work in unison with
Mithra, Ahura Mazda stands first; Mithra-Ahura ate invoked together as a
couple. Their union is pre-Zarathushtrian and corresponds to the Vedic
Mitra-Varuna. A detailed account of their joint activity is not found in the

Avesta, but they are called the two exalted, imperishable, and holy ones,123
and are invoked for special help.124 Mithra is again jointly invoked with
Hvarkhshaeta, the angel presiding over the sun. This is natural, because one
of the chief Iunctions of Mithra is to work as the guardian of light. Of the
five Zoroastrian Nyaishes, or litanies, two are consecrated to the sun and
Mithra, and these two are always recited together.125 On the moral side
Mithra protects truth. Consequently at an early date he is associated with
Rashnu, who is the chief genius of truth.126 They are united as two friends,127
One of the principal attributes of Mithra is that he is the lord of wide
pastures. In this capacity he joins in partnership with Raman Khvastra, who
is essentially the angel that gives good pastures and happy dwellings,
together with full joy of life.128
123. Y1.11; 2.11; Nyl.7; 2.2; Yt10.113, 145.
124. Yt10.113.
125. Ny1.2; Yt6.
126. Vr7.2; Yt13.47, 48; 14.47; 24.52; Vd4.54.
127. Yt10.79, 81.
128. Y2.3; 25.4; Vr2.9; Vd3.1; G1.2, 7, 8; S1.16; 2.16. Mithra, the genius of
light. On the material side Mithra presides over light, especially over the
light that radiates from [186] the sun with the radiance of which he is
identical on the physical plane. As the harbinger of light and herald of the
dawn, Mithra precedes the rising sun on the summits of mountains, and from
there watches all Aryan settlements, nay more, even all the seven Zones of
the world.129 The great vault of heaven is therefore Mithra's garment.130
Ahura Mazda and the Amesha Spentas, being in one accord with the sun,
have built up for Mithra a dwelling as wide as the earth in this material
world, on the great mountain Hara Berezaiti (Alburz) where neither night
nor darkness, nor cold wind, nor hot wind, nor sickness, impurity; death and
clouds can ever reach.131 From this elysian abode Mithra surveys the whole
universe at a glance.132 Sleepless and ever wakeful, he watches and spies the

doings of men, like Vedic Mitra-Varuna, as an infallible sentinel of heaven.
He has posted eight of his comrades as scouts on the celestial watch-towers
to spy upon men's doings.133 After the sun has set, Mithra traverses the world
all around, and surveys all that is between earth, and the heavens.134 Ahura
Mazda consequently has ordained that Mithra should watch from on high
over the entire moving world.135 The heat of Mithra it is, accordingly, that
gives warmth and life to the plant world and bestows fertility upon this
earth. Mithra, as a guardian genius in the celestial realm, superintends the
vast expanse of the universe. Varuna has a thousand eyes,136 and Mithra is
constantly spoken of as having a thousand ears and ten thousand eyes. The
brilliant sun is the lord of yonder heavens, who with his infinite rays of light
pervades the whole world, Mithra furthermore receives in the Avesta the
standing epithets dainghu-paiti, 'the lord of countries,' and vourugaoyaoiti 'of
wide pastures.' His light is the dispeller of darkness and of all the sin and evil
concomitant with it. Nothing is secret from Mithra's penetrating gaze.
Mitra-Varuna have a thousand-eyed spies (spasah), who descend from
heaven and traverse the world, watching the doings of mankind. Mithra, as
we have seen, has ten thousand spies (spaso), who work as his messengers.
129. Yt10.13, 15; Vd19.28.
130. Yt13.3.
131. Yt10.44, 50, 51.
132. Yt10.64.
133. Yt10.45.
134. Yt10.95.
135. Yt10.103.
136. RV. 7.34.10. Mithra, the inveterate foe of falsehood. Yet after all, the
greater and more important work of Mithra lies in the abstract [187] sphere.
At a very early date Mithra was styled the warder of truth. Light is

synonymous with truth, as darkness is with falsehood. Mithra being primarily
the lord of light, it was but a step from the physical to the moral sphere that
he should be depicted impersonating truth. From the divine activity of
Mithra, as portrayed in the Avestan texts, we gather more information of his
aggressively active crusade against falsehood than of his work in upholding
truth. In his warring capacity of lord of hosts, Mithra works more than all
else to deal a destructive blow to the demon of falsehood, thereby
strengthening the realm of truth. To speak untruth was a henious sin. Truth
Was a paramount among the ancient Iranians. It was regarded as everything,
it was religion. On this very account we see human evil reflectively focussed
in the Avesta as the druj, 'Lie,' which corresponds to drauga in the Old Persian
Inscriptions of the Achaemenian kings, a conception almost like that of the
devil. Herodotus writes that one of the first things that every Persian child
was taught was to speak the truth.137 Lying unto Mithra brings the offender
the sin of being a deceiver of Mithra. The faithful is exhorted never to lie, for
Mithra is unforgiving toward liars. Sad is the abode wherein live those that
lie unto Mithra, for they are childless, and even their cattle stray along the
road shedding tears over their chins.138 Neither the lord of the house, nor the
lord of the clan, nor the lord of the town, nor the lord of the country should
ever lie unto this celestial being.139 He is the protector and guardian of these
lords, only so long as they lie not unto him.140 If, however, they commit such
a sin, Mithra is offended and angered, and destroys house, clan, town, and
the country, along with their masters and nobles.141 Nor can these culprit
lords escape him, for he overtakes them, no matter how swiftly they may
run.142 The man of little faith who thinks that he can evade Mithra and
indulges in falsehood is mistaken;143 but Mithra thinks in his mind that were
the evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds of the earthly man a hundred
times worse, they would not rise as high as the good thoughts, good words,
and good deeds of the heavenly Mithra.144 Or again if the innate wisdom of
the earthly man were a hundred times greater, [188] it would not rise as high
as the heavenly wisdom of the Mithra; or if the ears of the earthly man could
hear a hundred times better, he would not hear so well as the heavenly
Mithra who with a thousand devices of his, hears well and sees every man
that tells a lie.145 To such a one Mithra gives neither strength nor vigour,
glory nor reward,146 but on the contrary, he inflicts dire punishment. Into the
hearts of all such he strikes terror, taking away the strength of their arms,

fleetness from their feet, the sight from their eyes, and the hearing from their
ears.147 It is he that hurls down their heads as he deals death.148 Mithra keeps
back harm and death from him who lies not unto him.149 Neither the wound
of the well-sharpened spear nor that of the well-darted arrow harm him
whom Mithra comes to help.150
137. Herod. 1. 136
138. Yt10.38.
139. Yt10.17.
140. Yt10.80.
141. Yt10.18.
142. Yt10.20.
143. Yt10.105.
144. Yt10.106.
145. Yt10.107.
146. Yt10.62.
147. Yt10.23, 48, 63.
148. Yt10.37.
149. Yt10.22.
150. Yt10.63. Mithra the guardian of contracts. Ahura Mazda enjoins upon
Zarathushtra not to break the contract that is entered into with the righteous
or with the wicked, for Mithra stands for both the righteous and the
wicked.151 In his role of genius of light he guards the sanctity of oaths, and

the word mithra in the Avesta is frequently used as a common noun, meaning
'contract.'152 For that reason, he who violates the oath, whether it be with a
believer or a non-believer, feels the visitations of the stern angel's wrath. The
crime of the one who thus violates a contract is called Mithra-druj, 'deceiving
Mithra.' Such a criminal is heavily punished, and his guilt falls upon the
shoulders of his kinsmen for years in the next world, making them
answerable for it by punishment.153 The ethics of thus holding a man's family
and kinsmen responsible for his guilt seems to be a relic of the primitive type
of group morality.
151. Yt10.2.
152. Ytl0.116, 117; Vd4.2-16.
153. Vd4.5-10. Mithra as a war divinity. Incidental allusion has been made
above to Mithra as the lord of hosts. For that reason it is easy to comprehend
the fact that warring nations invoke Mithra for help before going into battle;
and the lord of hosts sides with that army which excels in offering
sacrifice.154 When Mithra marches out amid the hostile armies on the
battlefield, he throws confusion into the camp of the enemy that has
offended him, [189] binds the hands of his offenders, covers their eyesight,
takes away their power of hearing, deprives their feet of movement,155 and
breaks asunder their lines of battle, striking terror in their entire array.156
Though the enemy use arrows and spears, swords and maces, they
nevertheless miss the mark in every case,157 and, all the while, Mithra rushes
destructively from a thousand directions against the foes.158 The adversaries
who have lied unto him he kills by fifties and hundreds, by hundreds and
thousands, by thousands and tens of thousands, by tens of thousands and
myriads.159 Confusing their minds, he shatters their limbs and breaks their
bones asunder,160 at the same time as he throws down their heads161 he enters
the battlefield in person, and levels his club at both the horse and the
rider.162
154. Yt10.9.
155. Yt10.48, 63.

156. Yt10.36, 41.
157. Yt10.39, 40.
158. Yt10.69.
159. Yt10.43.
160. Yt10.71, 72.
161. Yt10.37.
162. Yt10.101. Mithra’s chariot. Mithra goes forth on his daily round
through the heavens and upon the earth driving in a celestial car that rolls
upon one golden wheel, evidently the sun, with a shining axle.163 Ahura
Mazda made his chariot of heavenly substance and inlaid it with stars.164 Like
Sraosha's vehicle it is drawn by four white stallions that eat celestial food and
are are undying, shining, and spiritual.165 When Mithra drives on aloft over
the seven zones he is escorted on the left and the right, in front and from
behind, by Sraosha, Nairyosangha, Ashi Vanghuhi, Parendi, Nairya HamVareti, Kingly Glory, the Sovereign Sky, Damoish Upamana, Rashnu,
Chisti, Atar, Verethraghna, and the Fravashis.166 With bows and arrows,
spears and clubs, and with swords and maces placed by thousands in his
chariot, this divine war lord plunges, mace in hand, into the field of battle,
smiting and killing the wicked that have been false to him.167 Even Angra
Mainyu and the fiendish demons flee away in terror before Mithra.l68 After
smiting the demons and the men who have lied unto him, he drives forward
through the seven Zones.169
163. Ytl0.67,136.
164. Yt10.143.
165. Yt10. 68, 125.

166. Yt10.52,66,68,100,126,127.
167. Yt10.96, 102, 112, 127-132.
168. Ytl0.97,99,134.
169. Yt10. 133.
Mithra’s wrath. Mithra bemoans with uplifted hands before Ahura Mazda
the disregard and negligence of men who do not invoke him by his name,
even though he protects and guards [190] them.170 If he were invoked by
men, he says, as other angels are, he would come at the appointed time for
help to the righteous.171 He looks, therefore, for votaries who will sacrifice
unto him, so that in his might he may shower gifts upon them. Happy
indeed is the man who thus gains the good-will of Mithra, for this divine
angel henceforth bestows upon him radiance and glory, soundness of body,
riches and weal, offspring and sovereignty.172 But woe is to him that is
sparing in Mithra's invocation. For such a Wight calamity is in store, as
Mithra is terrible to deal with when his righteous wrath is kindled. Mithra,
when angered or disregarded in worship, inflicts poverty and wretchedness,
sickness and death upon the offender, depriving him also of his offspring and
power.173 The house, clan, town, and country in which an insult is offered to
Mithra are levelled to the ground.174 He deprives the evil countries of their
greatness and glory and victory, and renders them helpless.175 The wise
therefore pray that they may never come across Mithra's wrath,176 and
invocation is the best means of appeasing the vengeful angel.177
170. Yt10.53, 54.
171. Yt10.55,73,74.
172. Yt10.108, 109.
173. Yt10.110,111.
174. Yt10.28.87.

175. Yt10.27.
176. Yt10.69, 98, 135.
177. Yt10.120.
Sacrifices to Mithra. Varuna sits on the strewn grass at the sacrifice.178
Similarly, the faithful devoutly invoke Mithra by his name with libations,
and implore him to come and sit at the sacrifice, to listen to the invocation,
to be pleased with it, to accept it, and to place it with love to their credit in
paradise.179 Ahura Mazda himself offered a sacrifice unto him in the shining
Garonmana.180 Zarathushtra is asked to offer sacrifices unto Mithra and so
are the Mazdayasnians asked to sacrifice unto him with cattle and birds,
along with Haoma and libations.181 The faithful who desires to drink the
holy libations consecrated in honour of Mithra is required to undergo certain
penances. He has to wash his body for three days and three nights and
undergo thirty stripes, or he might wash his body for two days and two
nights and undergo twenty stripes, as the occasion requires. Anyone who has
no knowledge of the ritual is prohibited from partaking of the sacred
libation.182 In these observances we can [191] recognize the beginnings of
the later Mithraic rites and mysteries for which the cult of Mithra, centuries
afterwards, became famous. Mithra demands that his sacrifice shall be
performed with out-and-out devotion. Ahura Mazda says unto Zarathushtra
that if a sacrifice is offered unto Mithra by a holy and righteous priest,
Mithra will be satisfied, and will straightway come to the dwelling of the
supplicant, but if it is performed by an unholy priest, it is rejected, no matter
how long has been the sacrifice, nor how many bundles of the sacred twigs
are consecrated.183 Mithra promptly comes to help when he is satisfied.184 He
brings sovereignty for him who has piously offered him libations,185 and
gives him a good abode with desirable possessions.186 He is to be offered
sacrifices around and within countries, in and above countries, under and
before and behind countries.187
178. RV. 1.2.64; 5.72.2.

179. Ytl0.31,32,57.
180. Yt10.123.
181. Yt10.119.
182. Yt10.120-122.
183. Yt10.137-139.
184. Ytl0.87.
185. Yt10.16.
186. Ytl0.77.
187. Yt10.144; Ny2.11.
Mithra's boons. He is constantly spoken of as giving happy and joyful abode,
to the Aryan peoples. Many indeed are the boons asked for from Mithra by
his votaries, who always approach him with love, homage and sacrifice. He is
generally invoked to come to the faithful for help, freedom, joy, mercy,
healing, victory, well-being, and sanctification. The masters of the house,
clan, town, and country invoke him for help, so do the poor, when wronged,
look to him for the redress of their grievances.l88 The husbandman solicits
that rich pasture may never fail him. Horsemen sacrifice unto him even from
on horseback and beg swiftness for their teams, vigour for their bodies, and
might for overthrowing their adversaries.189 Neither the spear of the foe nor
his arrow hits the man whom Mithra helps,190 for he guards and protects man
from behind and in front.191 furthers the possessions of man, he gives flocks
of cattle, male offspring, chariots, spacious mansions, and prosperity192 he is
therefore entreated to grant riches, courage, victory, good name and fame,
felicity, wisdom, and strength to smite the adversaries.193 The worshipper
prays that just as the sun, rising beyond the Alburz, reaches the height, so
may he, with his ascending prayer, rise above the will of Angra Mainyu and
approach [192] Mithra.194 Mithra's help, it may be added, is invoked for both

the worlds.195
188. Yt10.83, 84.
189. Yt10.1,94,114.
190. Yt10.24.
191. Yt10.46.
192. Yt10.28,30.
193. Yt10.33, 34, 58, 59.
194. Yt10.118.
195. Yt10.93.
RASHNU
Personification of truth. This angel is preeminently genius of truth. His
standing epithet is razishta, 'most upright'. To adopt the phraseology of the
Younger Avestan texts, Rashnu is the most holy, the most well-shaped,
exalted, courageous, most knowing, the most discerning, the most foreknowing, most far-seeing, the most helping, the greatest smiter of thieves
and bandits.l96 He is as bright as the fire.197 Zarathushtra blesses king
Vishtaspa that he may be of right faith like Rashnu.198 196. Yt10.126; 12.5-8.
197. Vsp. 16.1.
198. AZ.7.
The eighteenth day of the month is consecrated to him.199
199. Y16.5; Sr. 1.18; 2.18. Rashnu presides at the ordeal court. The twelfth
Yasht consecrated to Rashnu deals mainly with the preparation of the ordeal;
and his presence at such trials is deemed indispensable.200 In fact he is the

chief celestial judge who presides at the ordeal. No specific habitat is
assigned to Rashnu. The officiating priest has to invoke him to come to the
ordeal from whatever part of the world he happens to be in at that time,
whether in one of the seven zones of the habitable world, or on the great
waters or on some part of the wide earth, or on the high mountains, on the
stars and the moon and the sun, or in the endless light, even in paradise.201
The man who lies at the ordeal offends both Rashnu and Mithra, and is
consequently punished.202 200. See Dhalla, 'The Use of Ordeals among the
Ancient Iranians,' in Le Museon, vol. II, p. 121-133, Louvain, 1910.
201. Yt12.9-38
202. Vd4.54,55.
We have already seen how Rashnu is often invoked in company with Mithra,
and likewise with Sraosha; in a similar manner, as noted in the next
paragraph, we generally find Arshtat the female personification of rectitude,
invoked alongside of Rashnu.203
203. Y1.7; 2.7; Yt10.139; 12.40; Sr.1.18; 2.1.8. [193]
ARSHTAT
Divinity of rectitude. Arshtat or Arshti is the female genius of truth. She
does not play any prominent part in the Younger Avestan period. She cooperates with Mithra, Sraosha, and Rashnu in the judgment of the dead.
Although the 18th Yasht is dedicated to Arshtat and bears her name, there is
not in it a single mention of her by name; the entire hymn treats only of the
Aryan Glory. In two Sirozah passages (1.26, 2.26) Mount Ushidarena
literally meaning 'the keeper of intelligence,' is invoked in company with
Arshtat; and tradition points to this mountain at the place where
Zarathushtra retired to meditate on the eternal problems of life and
commune with the divine. As noted above, Arshtat is generally invoked with
Rashnu;204 and she is called the world-increasing and the world-profiting.205
In one instance she is identified with the Mazdayasnian religion.206 The
faithful invoke her excellence.207 204. Y1.7; 2.7; Yt10.139; 12.40; Sr. 1.18;
2.18.

205. Y1.7; 2.7; Vsp. 7.2; Yt10.139; 11.16; 13.18; Sr. 1.26; 2.26
206. Vsp. 7.2
207. Y57.34. As conjectured by Foy,208 and established by Jackson,209 after a
careful examination of the Old Persian Inscription on the Behistan rock,210
the name of this angel occurs in the very short list of Zoroastrian divinities
known to the Achaemenian kings. The twenty-sixth day of the month is
sacred to her.211
208. KZ. 35.45; ZDMG. 54.364, n. 1.
209. Persia Past and Present, p. 203-205, New York, 1906.
210. Bh. 4.64.
211. Y16.6; Sr. 1.26; 2.26.
ERETHE AND RASANSTAT
Minor divinities of truth. By the names of Erethe and Rasantat are
designated two minor female angels presiding over truth. Nothing is known
about them excepting that they are invoked by name along with Chisti and
Ashi Vanghuhi.212 They are given the epithet 'good.' Erethe is once called
courageous.213 212. Y1.14; 3.16; 4.19; Vsp. 9.4; Sr. 1.25.
213. Vsp. 9.4. [194]
VERETHRAGHNA
The angel of victory. Verethraghna belongs to the Indo-Iranian divinities.
He is one of the most popular divinities of the Iranian cult. Indra's most
distinctive epithet in the Rig Veda is Vrtrahan, 'the slayer of Vrtra.' Its
Avestan corresponding word is Verethraghna which, however, is not used as
an epithet of some angel, but is the name of a powerful angel. Verethraghna
impersonates victory and he has preserved this trait throughout the various
epochs of Iranian religious thought. The Yasht bearing his name celebrates

his exploits. As the genius of victory, and created by Ahura Mazda,
Verethraghna is the best armed of the spiritual angels.214 He is the most
courageous in courage, the most victorious in victory, the most glorious in
glory, the most abounding in favours, the best giver of welfare, and the most
healing in health-giving.215 He is the giver of manliness, inflicting death,
maker of a new world, resolute, and self-willed.216 214. Yt14.1,6,etc.
215. Yt14.3, 7, etc.
216. Yt14.28, 30, 32. King Vishtaspa is blessed by Zarathushtra that he may
be a conqueror of his enemies like Verethraghna.217 The twentieth day of the
month is dedicated to him.218 His constant associates are Ama, 'Courage,'
and Vanainti Uparatat, 'Dominating Excellence.'
217. AZ. 7.
218. Y16.5; Sr. 1.20; 2.20. The patron angel of the Iranian countries.
Verethraghna is one of the national divinities of the Aryans. If the nation
sacrificed unto Verethraghna with libations, and the sacred twigs, and
consecrated cooked repast of cattle, either white or of some other colour, no
hostile hordes, no plague, nor evil of any kind would enter the Aryan
lands.219 The sacrifice is to be offered through righteousness, and none but
the righteous should partake of the holy food dedicated to Verethraghna.
Untold calamity would befall the Aryan countries if the wicked should have
a share in the sacred feast. In such an event plagues and foes would devastate
the country and the Aryans would be smitten by their fifties and their
hundreds, by their hundreds and their thousands, by their thousands and
their tens of thousands, by their tens of thousands and their myriads of
myriads.220
219. Yt14. 48-50.
220. Yt14.51-53. [195] Verethraghna's work. The armies that meet on the
battlefield invoke Verethraghna for victory. He favours that army which first
seeks his help.. The army that secures his aid is sure to conquer and not to be
conquered, it smites and is not smitten.221 He breaks asunder the columns of

the enemy, wounds them, shakes them, and cuts them to pieces.222 He brings
illness and death into the army that has lied unto Mithra, binds their hands
and feet, and deprives them of their eyesight and hearing.223 He destroys the
malice of the malicious demons and men, sorcerers and fairies, the willfully
blind, and the willfully deaf. 224 Zarathushtra sacrificed unto Verethraghna,
imploring from him victory in thought, victory in word, victory in deed,
victory in addressing. and victory in replying.225 Verethraghna imparts to the
prophet the excellence of uprightness, the strength of the arms, the health of
the body, the strength of the body, and the powerful vision of the eyes.226
221. Yt14.43, 44.
222. Yt14.62.
223. Yt14.47,63.
224. Yt14.4.
225. Yt14.28, 30, 32.
226. Yt14.29,31,33. His metamorphoses. Verethraghna, along with Dahma
Afriti and Damoish Upamana, imports a peculiar aspect into the Iranian
pantheon, that of assuming various shapes and manifesting his individuality
in many forms. As the lord of victory he is ever ready to help those who
invoke him, and comes down to his votary under different guises. Ten of
such forms of Verethraghna are mentioned, when he appeared to
Zarathushtra. The divinity successively assumes the form of the wind, a bull,
a horse, a camel, a boar, a youth, a raven, a ram, a he-goat, and finally of a
man.227 He escorts Mithra in the shape of a boar to smite those that have lied
unto the guardian of truth.228
227. Yt14.2,7,9,11,15,17,19,23,25,27.
228. Yt10.70.
RAMAN

He causes the joy of life. Another instance of a hymn consecrated in name
to one Yazata, but wholly devoted to the praise and glorification of another,
is furnished by Ram Yasht (15). Raman is merely invoked by name along
with Vayu at the beginning [196] and the end of the Yasht. Vayu, the genius
of wind, is the co-labourer of Raman, and the Yasht treats of his
achievements. Raman Khvastra is the genius of the joy of life. The joy that
he imparts is not the joy of the spirit, and does not convey any spiritual
significance. It is the joy or pleasure pertaining to this life. Raman's joy
makes man full of zest for life. Good abodes and good pastures that bring
comfort and happiness in the present life are Raman's gifts. Savouriness of
food is from him. Rich harvest, fertile fields, wide pasture, abundant fodder,
and thick foliage, are the boons of Raman and his associate divinities, like
Mithra and Vayu.229 In fact it is Mithra and Tishtrya who impart this joy to
the abodes of the Aryan nations.230 The waters of Ardvi Sura Anahita are
likewise invoked to grant joyful dwellings for the worshippers of Mazda.231
Zarathushtra wishes King Vishtaspa the joy of Raman.232 We have already
seen that Zarathushtra's joyful outlook on life pervades the Younger Avesta.
Gaiety of spirit and cheerfulness of nature characterize the people of the
period.
229. Y1.3; 2.3; 22.23; 25.4; Vsp. 1.7; 2.9; Yt10.146. Yt15; Sr. 1.21; 2.21; Vd.
3.1; G. 1.7.
230. Yt8.2; 10.4.
231. Y68.14.
232. Yt23.7; 24.6.
RATA
Physical and mental inequality leads to economic inequality. Providence
does not distribute the physical and mental gifts to man on the basis of
equality. Some are born with agile, robust, and healthy bodies, whereas
others are burdened with sluggish, weak, and sickly bodies. Mankind has
contributed considerably by its vice of ages to the deformity of body and
derangement of mind. Men and women are born with unequal physical and

mental strength. The strong and strenuous, cunning and resourceful,
vigorous and adventurous mercilessly overthrow the weak and slow, simple
and dull, timid and indolent in the fierce scramble for the good things of life.
The unequal distribution by nature of the gifts of body and brain, aided by
selfishness and greed on the part of man bring about economic inequality.
The disparity of poverty and wealth has appeared on the face of the earth
ever since society took to settled life and, with the [197] division of labour,
embarked upon earning means of livelihood by different kinds of work. The
strong have exploited the labour of the weak and forced them to slave like
beasts of burden with their eyes raining tears of sorrow. The fear of
starvation has hovered over millions of huts like vultures. The poor have
generally lived in squalor and sickness and died like flies. Countless persons
have not experienced a full and satisfied stomach from birth to death. Kindly
mothers have eaten only half the bread that their children may have the
other half. Multitudes of children have lived with wasted cheeks, sunken
eyes, and emaciated bodies among the dregs of life. Men and women have
sweated and starved and grown gray before their time. Physical sufferings
have rendered many the shadows of themselves, made them live two years in
one and age fast. Many have found it hard to equate the income and
expenses, and earned a precarious living. The people whose tragedy it has
been to be poor have always outnumbered the rich in the world. When life
has thus denied many the barest necessities of life, it has loaded others with
abundance. Men of industry and enterprise have amassed riches, others have
inherited wealth, still others have filled their coffers by foul means. Some
have been parasites fattening upon the sweated toil of the tillers of the soil
and have wrung from them the fruits of their labour. They have revelled in
superfluous riches. They have lived in spacious halls with frescoed walls, and
velvet hangings looped with golden tassels. They had a retinue of servants at
their beck and call and lounged away their time upon luxurious divans. They
had sumptuous tables laden with a dozen courses and sparkling wines and fed
themselves to early death. Others gave themselves up to gaiety and
licentiousness. Many have indulged in ostentatious and extravagant luxury
when the vast numbers of the poor have clothed themselves in rags and their
children have suffered from malnutrition. The insolence and hauteur, the
cold behaviour and thinly concealed slights have stung the helpless poor to
the quick. The poor took the counsels of contentment given by the wise to

heart and resigned themselves to the inscrutable will of God. Moreover,
there have always been noble souls everywhere who have come forward to
father society's orphans and destitutes. They have acted on the principle that
wealth was not given them [198] for their selfish use, and that the rich were
the stewards of their wealth given them by God for the amelioration of the
condition of the poor. When some have not given anything from their
abundance, many have always given something, and the few have given up
their all.
Charity personified. The female genius of charity, grace, or alms-giving is
Rata, the companion of Spenta Armaiti, with whom she is conjointly invoked
in the hymns of praise.233 Through her Ahura Mazda gives reward,234 for he
has spoken of her with express sanction to Zarathushtra, and in obedience
the prophet has introduced her to humanity.235 The faithful pray that they
may win Ahura Mazda's favours through Rata.236 She nourishes the poor.237
Sraosha is the best protector of the poor.238 He shelters poor men and
women in his mansion.239 Haoma exalts the mind of the poor.239a With
uplifted hands do the ill-treated poor call Mithra for help.240 The faithful
fervently pray that the spirit of charity of the religious devotee241 may drive
away the demon of stinginess from the house. If one of the faith approaches
another seeking goods, or a wife, or knowledge, the man of means should
help him with goods, he should arrange for the marriage of this poor
coreligionist, he should pay for his instruction in religious matters.242 It is in
every man's power to practise charity, either in thoughts, or in words, or in
deeds.
233. Sr. 1.5; 2.5.
234. Y40.1.
235. Y65.9.
236. Y40.4.
237. VYt36

238. Yt11.3.
239. Y57.10.
239a. Y10.13.
240. Yt10.84.
241. Y60.5.
242. Vd4.44.
AKHSHTI
The angel of peace. This female divinity is peace personified, but even
though perfectly clearly recognizable as such, she is very obscurely outlined
as to traits. She is invoked in company with Vohu Manah, or Good Mind,243
for nothing can break the inner peace in which the spirit of a man of good
thoughts reposes. Akhshti is usually called victorious.244 243. Yt2.1; Sr.l.2;
2.2.
244. Vsp. 7.1; Yt2.1, 6; 11,15; 15.1; Sr. 1.2; 2.2. The term Akhshti occurs also
as a common noun. This peace as well as war lies in the power of Mithra to
bring upon the [199] country.245 The rulers invoke Chisti to procure peace
for their countries,246 and the faithful pray that peace and concord may drive
out discord and strife from their abodes.247
245. Yt10.29.
246. Yt16.19.
247. Y60.5.
MANTHRA SPENTA
The spirit of the spells. The Gathas spoke of the mânthra, the sacred formula,
or inspired utterance of great spiritual potency, but did not personify it. The
Avestan texts do so, however, under the name Manthra Spenta, or Holy

Formula. The manthras generally indicate the spells of magical charms in the
Younger Avesta. Manthra Spenta, the embodiment of the holy spell, is
invoked along with Daena, the genius of religion, and Vohu Manah's
wisdom.248 As an angel presiding over the formulas of the faith he wards off
evil, exorcises those possessed of the demons, and heals the sick; he is
consequently invoked to heal the ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine diseases created by Angra Mainyu.249 He is efficacious and the
most glorious one,250 and like every other angel, Manthra Spenta has his
Fravashi.251 The twenty-ninth day of the month is sacred to him.252
248. Sr. 1.29; 2.29.
249. Vd. 22.2, 6.
250. Y1.13; 2.13; 25.6; Vsp. 21.2; Vd. 22.2, 6.
251. Yt13. 86.
252. Y16.6. The potency of the spells. The collocation manthra spenta
occurs more frequently in its ordinary meaning than as the name of the angel
presiding over the holy spells. The term mânthra without its appellative
spenta is also freely used to designate the sacred texts. It is also used for the
magical spells of various degrees of efficacy. These spells are interspersed in
the Avestan texts, especially in the Yashts and the Vendidad. Their conjuring
efficacy is very great. They are supposed to have inherent mysterious power
of their own, and the mere recital of these magical charms produces
marvellous effects. The mystical compositions, as such, are credited with
some kind of spiritual efficacy, some superhuman power; and through the
recitation of them man can avert the baneful influence of the demons. Such
/// [200] spells are awful, efficacious, victorious, healing.253 The recital of the
holy spell gives easy delivery at birth, and helps in the growth of the child.254
He who heals by the recital of the holy spells is the best healer, for he best
drives away sickness from the body.255 These magical incantations are mostly
used to drive away the demons of defilement, disease, and death. The holy
spell is the very soul of Ahura Mazda.256 Whoso pronounces the names of
Ahura Mazda by day and by night, on leaving his bed, or while retiring for

sleep, or upon leaving his home or his town, is able to withstand the attacks
of the demons, and will receive as much succour and help as a thousand men
could jointly give to one man. 257
253 Yt14.46.
254 Vd. 21.6, 10, 14.
255 Yt3.6. Vd. 7.44.
256 Yt13.81; Vd. 19.14.
257 Yt1.16-19.
The chief spells. Some of the most excellent, the most mighty, the most
efficacious, the most smiting, the most victorious, the most healing, the
greatest, and the best of the spells are the Ahuna Vairya formula, the
Airyaman Ishya prayer, the names of Ahura Mazda and of the Amesha
Spentas.258 The Airyaman Ishya is the greatest, best, fairest, most fearful,
most firm most victorious, and the most healing of all spells.259 Saoshyant
and his companions will recite the Airyaman Ishya prayer at the time of the
renovation of the world. Through its intonation Angra Mainyu and his evil
crew shall be hidden in the earth, the dead shall rise up, and Ahura Mazda
shall rule according to his divine will.260 There are other sacred formulas of
great importance, such as the Ashem Vohu and Yenghe Hatam. These are
composed in the Gathic dialect and are of rare merit. They are next in
importance only to the most sacred formula of all, the Ahuna Vairya, which
is spoken of in the following paragraph.
258 Yt1.1-3; 3.5,6; 11.3; WFr. 4.1.
259 Yt3.5.
260 WFr. 4. See Haas, An Avestan Fragment on the Resurrection, with translation
and notes in Spiegel Memorial Volume, p. 181-187, Bombay. 1908.

Ahuna Vairya. The greatest of all the spells, the Word par excellence of the
Zarathushtrian theology, which is constantly on the tongue of the faithful, is
the Ahuna Vairya. It is made up of twenty-one words, every one of which
corresponds to one [201] of the twenty-one Nasks which make up the
complete Holy Writ of the Zoroastrians. It is the quintessence of the entire
scriptures. In reply to the prophet's inquiry about the origin of this sacred
formula, Ahura Mazda says that before the heavens, before the waters,
before the earth, before the animals, before the trees, before the fire, before
men, before the archangels, before the demons. and before the entire
material existence, Ahuna Vairya was.261 Ahura Mazda pronounced it when
the world was not.262 One correct recitation of it without any omission is
worth the chanting of a hundred Gathas,263 and will enable the devout to
reach paradise.264 Of all the sacred formulas that have ever been pronounced
or are now recited, or which will be recited hereafter, this word that the Lord
God has announced to the holy prophet is the best.265 It gives courage and
victory to the soul and conscience of man.266 Humanity would redeem itself
from the death by embracing it in the fullness of faith.267 261 Y19.1-4.
262 Y19.8.
263 Y19.5.
264 Y19.6.
265 Y19.10.
266 Yt21.4.
267 Y19.10.
Zarathushtra chants aloud this Word when the demon Buiti seeks his death,
and he puts the fiend to flight by the mere recital of it.268 With the same
word does the prophet repel the Evil Spirit himself, when he comes to tempt
him.269 268 Vd. 19.2.
269 Vd. 19.9.

The value of the recitation and the intonation of the formula is greatly
impaired when it is inattentively chanted with errors and omissions.270 Ahura
Mazda prevents the careless soul that makes such mistakes from entering
paradise.271
270 Y19.5.
271 Y19.7.
The number of times that the spells are recited. The tenth Fargard or
chapter, of the Vendidad gives a list of the Gathic stanzas which are to be
repeated twice, three times, and four times at the beginning of the spells to
repel evil. The Airyaman Ishya prayer is generally repeated four times. The
most frequently occurring formulas that are repeated in various numbers, as
the occasion demands, are the Ashem Vohu and the Ahuna Vairya. They are
generally used at the opening or at the close of all prayers. The number of
times which they are recited varies from one to a hundred thousand, or to be
precise, the following specific numbers are found among the references to
the [202] different prayers: one, two, three, four, five, seven, eight, ten,
twelve, twenty-one, one hundred, two hundred, twelve hundred, and a
hundred thousand.
Those privileged to recite the spells. Manthrans, or chanters are those who
are privileged to recite the spells.272 Whoso seeks wisdom with pious intent is
to be taught the holy spells.273 The knowledge of the secret formulas is to be
zealously guarded, it is to be imparted only to the veriest few in the closest
circle.274 The potency of such spells greatly lies in their careful and accurate
recitation, without omitting any part of the prescribed formulas, or without
violating the rigid rules of the manner of chanting. This requires that the
reciter should be well versed in the art of exorcising, of healing, or in any
other function he undertakes to perform with the help of the sacred spells.
Teaching a manthra to an infidel is equivalent to giving a tongue to the
wolf.275
272 Y7.24; 41.5.

273 Vd. 4.44.
274 Yt4.10; 14.46.
275 TdFr. 3; Nr. 17.
DAHMA AFRITI
She personifies the power of benediction. Each time that a righteous person
offers sacrifices unto this personification of a divine blessing, she comes to
him in the shape of a camel.276 She is beautiful and friendly, she fills the
empty to over-filling and restores the sick to health.277 When the collocation
is used as a common noun it means the blessings of the pious. A healer takes
his fees from persons whom he heals. But when he cleanses or heals a priest
he has to do so for just the ‘blessing of the pious' that the priest can give.278
276 TdFr. 64; 65.
277 Vd. 22.5,12,18.
278 Vd. 7.41; 9.37.
DAMOISH UPAMANA
He personifies the power of anathema. This embodiment of the power to
utter an awful malediction upon an offender against righteousness is
generally mentioned alongside of Mithra.279 When Mithra goes forth on his
crusade against the demons and their followers throughout the seven zones,
this angel, with the dread power of uttering fatal imprecations, [203]
Accompanies him in the shape of a ferocious boar. 280 This sharp-toothed
and sharp-jawed frightful animal symbolizes the terrible power of the curse
for injury to the wrong-doer. Furthermore, when Ahura Mazda, the supreme
heavenly judge, comes down to attend the ordeal court, Damoish Upamana
is one of those to join among the number of his co-adjutors.281 The
contending parties were here put to self-imprecatory oaths. Divine wrath fell
upon him who swore falsely and the dreadful boar that typified the awful
potency of Dami Upamana's curse fell upon him and killed him at a stroke.

He is also seen moving in the company of the Fravashis when they go out to
the battlefield to help their favoured army.282 The sacrificing priest invites
him to attend the Yasna-sacrifice.283
279 Yt10.9,.66,68,127.
280 Yt10.127.
281 Yt12.4.
282 Yt13.47.
283 Y1.15; 2.15.
AIRYAMAN
The genius of health. This Indo-Iranian divinity originally conveys the idea
of comradeship and occurs in the Vedas as a groomsman at the wedding rites
and casually in the Avesta in connection with the wedding rites. The Fiftyfourth chapter of the Yasna is consecrated to Airyaman. He is invoked to
come down to the wedding for the joy of the faithful.284 In regard to
attributes given to Airyaman we may add in this connection that his standing
epithet is 'the beloved one.' 284 Y54.1.
But Airyaman plays a more prominent part in the Iranian literature as the
genius of health. He is an acolyte to Asha Vahishta, and is invoked together
with him.285 The third Yasht, which bears the name of Asha Vahishta, is, in
fact, mostly devoted to Airyaman. Ahura Mazda created this earth immune
from any sickness and disease, but the Evil Spirit introduced therein ninetynine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine diseases.286 Ahura Mazda
accordingly sends his messenger Nairyosangha to Airyaman with the request
to go to the world with his healing remedies. Airyaman quickly obeys the
divine command and begins his work.287 He smites and drives away all kinds
of sickness and death, magic and sorcery.288 Airyaman [204] does not heal by
means of herbs and drugs, medicine and surgery, but by the holy spells. In
fact one of the greatest of such sacred formulas, the Airyaman Ishya, as we
have already seen, bears his name and is used to smite all manner of disease

and death.289 At the recital of the magic formula flee sickness and death,
demons and infidels, the two-legged brood of wolfish and serpentine nature,
pride and scorn, slander and strife, falsehood and evil eye, courtezan and
sorcery. 290 It is employed to rout sorcerers, fairies, and the progeny of evil.291
285 Sr. 1.3;2.3.
286 Vd. 22.2,9, 15.
287 Vd. 22.7-20.
288 Vd.22.21-24.
289 Vd. 20.11, 12.
290 Yt3.7-13.
291 Vd. 20.9-12; 21.18-21.
HAOMA
The divinity of joint Indo-Iranian fame. One of the most distinctive features
common to the Indo-Iranian peoples before their separation is the HaomaSoma cult. The Avestan Haoma is identical with Vedic Soma, and both refer
to the sacred drink prepared from a special plant and partaken of as a part of
the ritual service. Haoma has secured a prominent place in the later Avestan
theology and forms an essential part of the Zoroastrian liturgy. Haoma
primarily is a plant of this world, from which the drink was quaffed as a
religious act, but the idea soon evolves into an angel of the same name
presiding over this plant. The two concepts are so closely interwoven that it
often becomes difficult to ascertain whether the Haoma occuring in a certain
passage is the genius of the plant of that name, or the plant itself. The same
difficulty is witnessed with reference to Soma in the Vedas. The
anthropomorphic character of both Haoma Soma is little pronounced. Three
chapters of the Yasna and a Yasht mostly composed of excerpts from the
Yasna are dedicated to Haoma. More than 120 hymns are devoted to Soma
in Rig Veda. Ahura Mazda brought for Haoma the star-bespangled spiritual

girdle, that is, the Mazdayasnian religion. Girt with this he dwells on the top
of the mountains,292 and from these heights he sacrifices unto Drvaspa,
Sraosha, Mithra, and Ashi Vanghuhi.293
292 Y9.26.
293 Y57.19; Yt9.17, 18; 10.88; 17.37, 38.
Haoma pleads the greatness of his cult. He is anxious that his cult, which
has been in vogue for centuries, be given a due [205] place in the new faith
and receive the sanction of the prophet. The poet depicts him as
approaching Zarathusbtra for this particular purpose. One morning, we are
informed, Haoma came to the prophet as he was chanting the sacred Gathas
before the fire-altar and asked him to seek his favour by consecrating the
Haoma juice for libations and to praise him as the other sages had praised
him.294 Vivasvant, Yama, and Trita Aptya were the first to sacrifice unto
Soma. The Avestan texts speak of the same persons who first offered
sacrifices unto Haoma. In reply to Zarathushtra’s inquiry Haoma proceeds to
give instances of some of the greatest of his celebrants. The first among the
mortals to sacrifice unto the angel Haoma by pounding the Haoma plant for
libation was Vivanhvant, and the great benefit he derived there from was
that the glorious Yima was born unto him.295 Athwya, Thrita, and
Pourushaspa, the father of the prophet himself, were among the other
prominent men who sacrificed unto Haoma. Their reward was that illustrious
sons were born unto them. Thus Zarathushtra himself was born unto
Pourushaspa because the latter praised Haoma.296 Zarathushtra, the poet
says, thereupon paid homage to the angel, and proclaimed his cult as the
most praiseworthy.297
294 Y9.1.
295 Y9.3, 4.
296 Y9. 6-13.
297 Y9.16.

Haoma’s titles. The standing epithet of Haoma is 'far from death.’ He is the
powerful one, and rules according to his will.298 He is the lord of knowledge
and possesses good wisdom.299 He is the healing one, beautiful, lordly, and of
golden eyes.300
298 Y9.25.
299 Y9.27; 10.2.
300 Yt9.17; 10.88.17.37.
His gifts. Zarathushtra invokes Haoma and asks from him intelligence,
courage, victory, health, increase, prosperity, vigour of body, and power to
rule at will, and to smite the wicked that he may vanquish the evil done by
the wicked men and demons.301 The prophet further prays to him for health
of the body, long duration of life, the all-shining abode of the righteous, the
realization of his wishes on earth, a complete triumph over the wicked and a
foreknowledge of the evil intents of the wicked:302 Haoma bestows these
boons upon him, Haoma in like manner gives knowledge to the aspiring
students, husbands to the ripening maidens, beautiful offspring and righteous
progeny to women, [206] and paradise to the righteous.303 The devout
worshipper, in return, dedicates his very body to him.304 Piety accompanied
by joy enters the house in which Haoma dwells. 305
301 Y. 9.17, 18.
302 Y9.19-21.
303 Y9.22,23; 11.10.
304 Y10.14; 11.10.
305 Y10.1.
Haoma implored to rout the wicked. This angel is invoked to guard the

faithful from the harm of the wicked, to take away the power of their hands
and feet and to confuse their minds, so that they cannot behold the universe
with both their eyes.306 He is besought to hurl his weapons at the skulls of
the wicked for the protection of the righteous,307 and to crush the thought of
the maligner.308
306 Y9.28,29.
307 Y9.30-32.
308 Y10.12.
Haoma's due. Haoma is to be propitiated with sacrifice. Among other
objects animals were sacrificed in the Zoroastrian ritual unto the angels, and
the different parts of the consecrated flesh were allotted to the various
Yazatas. The Pahlavi books elaborately treat the question of reserving
particular parts of the animal for the various Yazatas. We are told that Ahura
Mazda has set apart for Haoma as his share in the sacrifice the jaw-bone, the
tongue, and the left eye of the immolated animal.309 In general this is also in
accordance with the statement of Herodotus310 regarding the Persian acts of
sacrifice in worship.
309 Y11.4.
310 Herod. 1.132.
Haoma's curse. Haoma does not give good children of priestly virtues to the
woman who wrongfully partakes of the sacred cake consecrated to him.311
Whosoever deprives Haoma of his portion in the sacrifice, displeases him,
and the penalty he pays for this slight to Haoma is that a priest, a warrior, or
a husbandman is not thereafter born in his house.312 The faithful is exhorted
to propitiate him with his due portion, lest the offended angel should bind
him with heavy iron chains as he bound Franrasyan.313 Haoma pronounces
his curse of being childless and of evil name and fame against those who, like
thieves, rob him of his legitimate portion in the sacrifice.314 He hurled down
the arrogant Keresani from his throne.315

311 Y10.15.
312 Y11.5, 6.
313 Y11.7.
314 Y11.3.
315 Y9.24.
Haoma, king of plants. Haoma is the sovereign lord of all plants among
both the Indians and the Iranians. Physically it [207] is the plant that grows
on the highest summits of Mount Hara Berezaiti, the modern Alburz.3l6
According to the Vedic texts, it grows on the mount Mujavat. The birds
carried it from there in all directions.3l7 An eagle brought it down, says the
Veda.318 The nourishing earth is its mother where it grows in vales and dales,
spreading sweet perfume all around.319 It is of golden hue, say both, and the
celestial drink prepared from its branches is most invigorating and profitable
for the soul of man.319a Indulgence in intoxicating beverages causes wrath and
strife, quarrel and confusion, but the drink of Haoma is accompanied by
righteousness and piety.320 It confers immortality. It is the source of
righteousness.321 Haoma grows in abundance when it is praised by man. The
pounding of the Haoma juice for sacrifice is tantamount to the destruction of
the demons by thousands.322 Misery vanishes and happiness and health enter
the house in which Haoma is prepared 323 The exhilarating drink gives
inspiration and enlightenment to his supplicant and makes the beggar's mind
as exalted as that of the rich.324 The faithful pray that the healing remedies of
Haoma may reach them for the strength of their bodies.325 There is a close
affinity between the Haoma-Soma cults and the rituals performed to
celebrate them have great resemblance to each other. We shall notice it in
our chapter on rituals.
316 Y10.10.
317 Y10.11.

318 RV. 3.43.7; 4.26.6, etc.
319 Y10.4,17.
319a Y9.16.
320 Y10.8; Yt17.5.
321 Y10.4.
322 Y10.6.
323 Y10.7.
324 Y10.13.
325 Y10.14.
ASHI VANGHUHI
Physically she stands for plenty, morally for piety. On the physical side
Ashi Vanghuhi, or Good Sanctity, is the guardian of earthly riches. She fills
the barns of men with grain and with cattle, their coffers with gold, the fields
with foliage, the chests of virtuous women with ornaments and their boxes
with fine garments.326 She brings happiness, cattle, fodder, and protection to
him to whom the Glory cleaves.327 On the ethical side she personifies
sanctity and thus represents spiritual riches. She is [208] also the giver of the
mental riches unto men, that is, the bright understanding and the innate
wisdom.328 Ahura Mazda is her father and Spenta Armaiti, the embodiment
of holy devotion, is her mother. The archangels, as well as Sraosha, Rashnu,
and Mithra, are her brothers, and Daena, the genius of the holy faith of
Zarathushtra, is her sister.329 As the genius of plenty she joins Mithra, who
increases pastures and fodder.330 The seventeenth Yasht is dedicated to her.
Parendi, Chisti, Erethe, and Rasanstat are invoked in her compaNy331
326 Yt17.7-14.

327 Yt19.54.
328 Yt17.2.
329 Yt17.2,16.
330 Yt10.66.
331 Yt17.62; Sr. 1.25.
Ashi's attributes. She is bright, exalted, well-formed, well worthy of
sacrifice, possessed of the bright chariot, courageous, giver of weal and
health.332 She is beautiful, shining with joy, and far-reaching through
radiance.333 She, the exalted one, is well-made and of noble origin; she rules
at her will and is possessed of glory in her body.334 She, the courageous one,
carries all desirable things in her hands.335 She is the protector, guardian,
helper, healer, smiter of the malice of the demons and of the wicked men,
the giver of good gifts, blessings, and success, and the bestower of the
greatest, best, and the fairest reward unto men.336 She comes in the shape of
a well-built, beautiful, tall, high-up girded maiden of noble birth.337
332 Y2.14; 57.3; Yt17.1; Sr. 2.25.
333 Yt17.6.
334 Yt17.15.
335 Yt17.7-14.
336 Y52.1-3.
337 Yt13.107.
Her supplicants. Haoshyangha, Yima, Thraetaona, Haoma, Haosravah,
before Zoroaster, as well as the prophet himself and King Vishtaspa, his

royal patron and helper in the propagation of the new faith, are among the
most illustrious of her supplicants. These worshippers severally offered her
sacrifices and asked for various boons from her, which she granted in answer
to their prayers.338 The most favoured among her votaries is Zarathushtra
himself; for him her loving regard is great.339 This is because the prophet
himself is the visible embodiment of sanctity on earth and the promoter of
righteousness among men.
338 Yt17.24-26, 28-31, 33-35, 37-39, 41-43, 45-47, 49-52, 61.
339 Yt17.17-22.
[209] Her work. She is ever ready to help the faithful. She leads to
rectitude.340 She goes to those who invoke her from near or afar with pious
libations.341 The house which Ashi graces with her presence becomes full of
perfume.342 Happy indeed is the man whom Ashi attends, for riches,
abundance, and prosperity spring in his house. The kings whom she favours
have kingdoms rich in snorting horses, sounding chariots, flashing swords,
large tributes, and an abundance of rich food.343 Happy indeed are they
whom Ashi attends, for they come by well-furnished houses wherein live
righteous persons, rich in cattle, who have well-adorned beds, with rich
cushions, and with feet inlaid with gold.344 Their wives and daughters have
square bored earrings and necklaces of gold.345 And the men on whom Ashi,
the genius of fortune, smiles have hoards of silver and gold and rich garments
and swift and loud neighing horses and chariots, and large-humped, fiery
camels, and weapons of war.346 Glory is his whom she, in her goodness,
attends.347 The devout pray and implore her not to turn her face from them
and withhold her kindness from them.348 That Ashi may not quit their
houses, is the fervent prayer of the faithful;349 and the Fravashis are invoked
by the righteous to bring the blessed Ashi into their abodes.350 The
householder prays that she may come and stay in his house.351 She follows
the generous man who causes joy unto the righteous poor by his liberal gifts,
and the moment she puts her one foot in the house, it is filled with a
thousand fold flocks and horses and virtuous offspring.352 Zarathushtra asks
Ashi to bestow her gifts upon King Vishtaspa.353 The twenty-sixth day of the
month is sacred to her.354

340 Y56.3.
341 Yt17. 2.
342 Yt17.6.
343 Yt17.7.
344 Yt17.8,9.
345 Yt17. 10, 11.
346 Yt17.12-14.
347 Yt17.2.
348 Yt17.15.
349 Y60.7.
350 Yt13.157.
351 Y10.1.
352 Yt18.3-5.
353 Yt24.8.
354 Y16.6.
What offends Ashi most. She is grieved at the sight of maidens who remain
unmarried for a long time.355 She does not accept the libations offered by
sterile persons and wicked courtesans.356 As the zealous guardian of the
sanctity of matrimony, she abhors the wife who is untrue to the nuptial tie,
the woman who violates the law of chastity, and the adulteress who sells her

body for profit or pleasure.357 Three times does she [210] raise her wailing at
such a shameful display of unchastity and longs either to flee to the heavens
or sink into the earth, whereupon Ahura Mazda consoles her and leads her to
his celestial. abode.358
355 Yt17.59.
356 Yt17.54.
357 Yt17; 57, 58.
358 Yt17.57-60.
PARENDI
Ashi's associate. Parendi, as the female genius of riches, plenty, and activity,
is identical with the Vedic Puramdhi, the goddess of plenty. She is the
constant companion of Ashi Vanghuhi, and is invoked with her.359 She is
active in thought, active in word, and active in deed, and gives activity to
man's body.360 She moves about in a light chariot.361 As the impersonation of
earthly riches Parendi accompanies the celestial car of Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, or again she attends Tishtrya. the genius of rain, in furthering
the prosperity of the earth.362 Zarathushtra invokes her to enrich King
Vishtaspa.363
359 Y13.1; 38.2; Yt8.38; 10.66; Sr. 1.25; 2.25.
360 Vsp. 7.2.
361 Yt8.38; 24. 9; Sr. 1.25; 2.25.
362 Yt8.38: 10.66.
363 Yt24.9.
DRVASPA

The female genius of cattle. She is a female genius of the animal world. As
the guardian of herds, she is invoked in company with Geush Tashan and
Geush Urvan.364 A Yasht (9) is consecrated to her and bears her name, or
more familiarly that of Gosh or Geush Urvan. Drvaspa moves about in her
own chariot of sounding wheels. Mazda has made her heroic and righteous.
She is the bestower of health upon the cattle and kine. She watches well
from afar, gives welfare and long continuing friendship. She is nourishing,
courageous, well formed, possessed of weal, giver of health, and powerful
helper of the righteous.365
364 Sr. 1.14; 2.14.
365 Yt9.1,2,7,12,16,20,24,28.
Her sacrificers. The Yasht gives a list of her supplicants who have asked her
to grant them various boons. They are the same persons that invoke Ashi
Vanghuhi and pray for the same boons that they ask from her. The only
difference between the [211] forms of invoking Drvaspa and Ashi is that no
offering is made to Ashi by any of her supplicants, whereas in the case of
Drvaspa we see that with the exception of Haoma and Zarathushtra the
other heroes, Haoshyangha, Yima. Thraetaona, Haosravah, and Vishtaspa,
bring to her offerings of a hundred horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand
small cattle, and the libations.366
366 Yt9.3-5,8-11, 13.15, 17-19,21-23,25-27,29-32.
GEUSH TASHAN AND GEUSH URVAN
Drvaspa’s associates. We have seen above in the Gathas among the
impersonations of the animal world two distinct beings Geush Tashan,
Geush Urvan. Gav Azi represented the joy-giving cattle. In the later Avestan
texts Geush Tashan appears about six times.367 We do not hear anything
more definite regarding him than the fact that he is invoked by name along
with other tutelary divinities. It may indeed be emphasized that he is entirely
unknown from the time of the Pahlavi period onward. Geush Urvan is
invoked in company with Geush Tashan and Drvaspa.368 Gav Azi occurs but
once. The master of a house is enjoined to give a gav azi, or a three-year-old

cow, to the cleanser who imparted him bodily purification.369 Verethraghna,
the angel of victory, complains before Zarathushtra that the mischief of the
demons and their worshippers increases upon earth because men do not offer
sacrifices to Geush Urvan.370
367 Y1.2; 39.1; 70.2; Vsp. 9.5; Sr. 1.14; WFr. 6.1.
368 Y1.2; 39.1; 70.2; Vsp. 9.5; Sr. 1.14; 2.14.
369 Vd. 9.37.
370 Yt14.54.
HVAREKHSHAETA
The sun deified. Hvarekhshaeta is the shining sun as well as the genius
presiding over him. The sixth Yasht and the first Nyaish are consecrated to
him; but in fact the first two Nyaishes celebrate Hvarekhshaeta and Mithra
conjointly. These two litanies, moreover, are always recited together during
the day time. The treatment of the sun-Yazata, like that of Surya, the sun in
the Rig Veda, and the physical sun as a phenomenon of nature is so
complicated that it is difficult in many instances to [212] distinguish the one
from the other. It is not so much Havarekhshaeta in the capacity of an angel
that figures here, as does Hvarekhshaeta, the sun itself. The writer of the
hymn in honour of Hvarekhshaeta is more interested in depicting the
movements of the sun itself as the orb of day than in giving account of the
Yazata, or presiding genius of the sun. We have a vivid picture of the sun's
movements, its rising and setting, its power to rout the fiends of uncleanness
and impurity, but we have hardly anything which treats of the spiritual
personality behind this great luminary of nature. The worship of the brilliant
sun must have preceded the period of its deification, and the poet cannot
quite rid himself of the fascination of the primitive form of nature-worship.
The physical phenomenon of the sun is always present before the mind of
the writer; and there is very little attempt to address the presiding genius
through his visible image, the concrete representative being the direct object
of praise and glorification. The sun rises up above the mountain Hara
Berezaiti and enters upon his daily career.371 371 Yt10.118; Vd. 21.5.

Hvarekhshaeta is invoked by his name, and his standing epithets are 'the
imperishable, radiant, and the swift-horsed.' Ovid attests that a horse was
consecrated to the sun for the reason that the sun itself was swift moving like
the horse.372 Several classical writers write about the homage and sacrifice
offered by the Persians to the sun. A white horse of the best Nisaean breed
was selected for the sacrifice to the sun.373 A white chariot, covered with
garlands was sacred to the sun.374 A temple consecrated to the sun, with a
priestess of the royal family at its head, is mentioned.375 372 Fasti, 1.385.386.
373 Gray, op. cit., p. 85, 86; Fox and Pemberton, op. cit., p. 16,41,67, 69,84.
374 Xenophon, Cyropaedia, 8.3.12; Dio Chrysostom, Orationes, 36, 39.
375 Flavius Vopiscus, Aurelianus, 5.5.
The Amesha Spentas are all of one accord with the sun.376 When the sun
warms with its light, a hundred and a thousand spiritual Yazatas gather its
glory and distribute it upon the earth for the furtherance of the world of
righteousness.377 When the sun rises up, purification comes unto the earth
and unto the standing and flowing waters and unto the waters of the wells
[213] and seas, and unto the righteous creation of the Holy Spirit.378 If
indeed the sun were not to rise high up, the demons would destroy all things
that are in the seven regions. Not even the spiritual angels would find means
to withstand and repel them.379 The offering of sacrifice unto the Sun in
order to withstand darkness and demons, thieves and robbers, sorcerers and
enchantresses, is equivalent to sacrificing unto Ahura Mazda, Amesha
Spentas, the Yazatas, earthly and heavenly, and one's own soul.380 The
demons who, in the darkness of night, come out by the million from the
bowels of the earth, glide away as soon as the sun mounts the sky and the
world is ablaze with its. light. Though they feast in the night time, as
darkness is congenial to their nature, they fast during the day, for light is
destructive to their being. When the light of Hvarekhshaeta breaks through
the darkness of night, it drives away, not only darkness, but defilement,
disease, and death. Like the moon and the stars, it grieves the sun to shine
upon a defiled person.381 Ahura Mazda has the sun for his eye.382 In the

Vedic literature, the sun is similarly spoken of as the eye of Mitra Varuna.383
In the Litany to the sun, homage is paid to the two eyes of Ahura Mazda,384
which are evidently the sun and the moon. The heavens bathed in the light
of the sun form his garments.385 The eleventh day of the month is sacred to
him.386 376 Ny1.1.
377 Yt6.1; Ny1.11.
378 Yt6.2; Ny1.12.
379 Yt6.3; Ny1.13.
380 Yt6.4; Ny1.14.
381 Vd. 9.41.
382 Y1.11; 3.13; 4.16; 7.13; 22.13; 68.22.
383 RV. l.115.l; 6.51.l; 7.61.1,63.1; 10.37.1.
384 Ny1.5.
385 Yt13. 3.
386 Y16.4.
Leprosy is especially regarded as a consequence of sinning against the sun,
and Herodotus tells us that persons affected with the disease were not
permitted to enter a town.387
387 Herod. 1.138.
MAONGHAH
The moon personified. Herodotus writes that the moon is the tutelary
divinity of Persia.388 The case of this nature divinity is analogous to that of
the sun. Maonghah is at one [214] and the same time the moon and the

personification of the moon. The seventh Yasht and the third Nyaish are
dedicated to this divine personage. Here also we find throughout the
description of the waxing and the waning of the moon, the periods of the
new and the full moons, and the benefit that the light of the moon imparts to
the world. We hear much of the concrete moon, but very little of the
abstract person of the angel. The sole-created Bull, the progenitor of the
animal world, is invoked along with the moon.389 The moon waxes and
wanes through Ahura Mazda.390 The Amesha Spentas gather the glory of the
moon and distribute it upon the earth.391 When the moon warms up with its
light, the golden coloured plants grow up from the earth during the spring.392
388 Herod. 7.37.
389 Sr. 1.12; 2.12.
390 Yt7.2; Ny3.4.
391 Yt7.3; Ny3.5.
392 Yt7.4; Ny3.6.
The moon is constantly spoken of as the possessor of the seed of the Bull.393
The moon is furthermore described as the bestower, radiant, glorious,
possessed of water, possessed of warmth, possessed of knowledge, wealth,
riches, discernment, weal, verdure, good, and the healing one.394 The twelfth
day of the month is dedicated to the moon. 395
393 See Gray, in Spiegel Memorial Volume, p. 160-168.
394 Yt7.5; Ny3.7.
395 Y16.4.
ANAGHRA RAOCHAH
Deification of the endless light. Anaghra Raochah means the Endless Light.
It is the celestial light as opposed to the earthly light.396 In the order of
naming the various kinds of heavenly lights, Anaghra Raochah comes after

the stars, moon and the sun.397 Like the stars, the moon, and the sun, this
supreme light stood without motion until the Fravashis or the Guardian
Spirits showed it its path of movement.398 396 Vd.2.40.
397 Y71. 9; Yt12.35; 13.57; G. 3.6.
398 Yt13.57.
Anaghra Raochah is personified as a Yazata, being invoked at the sacrifice,399
and the thirtieth day of the Zoroastrian calendar bears his name. In a couple
of instances we find Paradise [215] and the Bridge of Judgment, likewise
Apam Napat, Haoma, Dahma Afriti, and Damoish Upamana, invoked along
with Anaghra Raochah.400 It is the name of the highest paradise.401
399 Y1.16; 16.6; 71.9; Sr. 1.30; 2.30; Vd. 19.35.
400 Sr. 1.30; 2.30.
401Yt22.15.
ASMAN
Firmament deified. In its original meaning Asman means the sky; it is later
personified as the genius of the sky, and invoked as a Yazata.402 He is
shining, exalted, and powerful. Asman and Vahishta Ahu, or Paradise, are
invoked together,403 and the twenty-seventh day of the Zoroastrian month is
called after the name of Asman.
402 Y1.16; 16.6; Sr. 1.27; 2.27.
403 Sr. 1.27; 2.27.
USHAH
The female divinity of dawn. Ushah is identical with the Vedic Ushas, and
is the female divinity of the dawn in both religions, thus coming down from
the common Indo-Iranian period. It is she who announces as the first glimpse
of light, to creation, the approach of dawn. Ushah's personality is very

faintly pronounced both in the Rig Veda and in the Younger Avestan texts.
The Vedic poets have, however, produced most exquisite lyric poetry in
praise of the dawn in about twenty hymns. There is only a short Avestan
hymn in prose composed to celebrate the dawn and even this has but six
lines devoted to the subject of the composition. Here she is described as
beautiful, resplendent, possessed of bright steeds, blessed, and heroic; and
her light illumines all the seven zones.404 Auxiliaries to Ushah are Ushahina
and Berejya and Nmanya. In fact Ushahina, who is also a male
personification of dawn, is the name of the fifth period of the day, and the
prayer consecrated to Ushah bears his name. The priest at the sacrifice
undertakes to propitiate Ushahina by sacrifice, if he has in thought, word,
deed, or will offended him.405
404 Yt5.62; Vd. 18.15, 23; G. 5.5.
405 Y1.20,21.
[216]
TISHTRYA
The star genius directs the rain. Next in importance to the sun and moon,
among the heavenly luminaries, are the countless stars. Among the stars that
are personified as objects of praise and reverence, the most prominent is the
radiant and glorious star Tishtrya. He is the star Sirius in the constellation of
Canis Major. The Yazata who impersonates this brilliant star bears naturally
also the same name. The Tishtrya Yasht (8) sings the glory of the twofold
work of Tishtrya, both as star and as the Yazata that presides over it.
Tishtrya is, therefore, the rain-star, and the Yasht gives a lively picture of his
movements in producing clouds and rain and sleet, and distributing them
over all the world. Tishtrya's constant companions are the starYazatas,
named Vanant, Satavaesa, and Haptoiringa, as guardian spirits of different
regions of the heavens.406 The thirteenth day of the month406a and the fourth
month of the year are sacred to him.
406 Sr. 1.13; 2.13; cf. Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, p.23.

406a Y16.4.
Tishtrya's attributes. His standing epithets are 'the radiant' and 'the
glorious.' He is the giver of fertility to the fields,407 the giver of happy and
good abode unto men, the white, shining, seen from afar, the healing, and
the exalted one.408 He is possessed of the seed of the waters, the valiant, the
courageous, far reaching, the efficient,409 and of sound eyes.410 Ahura Mazda
has appointed Tishtrya as the lord of all other stars, even as he has ordained
Zarathushtra as the spiritual lord of all mankind.411 The creator has made him
as worthy of sacrifice, as worthy of invocation, as worthy of propitiation, and
as worthy of glorification as himself.412 According to Plutarch he is
established as a scout over all other stars.413
407 Yt8.1.
408 Yt8.2.
409 Yt8.4.
410 Yt8.12; Ny1.8.
411 Yt8.44.
412 Yt8.50, 52.
413 Is. et Os. 47.
The sacrificial offerings enable Tishtrya to work with added vigour and
strength. Tishtrya smites the wicked fairies.414 Like Verethraghna, he takes
upon himself successive forms when he goes out for active work. He moves
forward in [217] the heavens for the first ten nights of the month in the form
of a young man, for the next ten nights in the form of a bull, and then for the
last ten nights in the shape of a white beautiful horse.415 In accordance with
the will of Ahura Mazda and the archangels, he traverses the most distant
parts of the earth,416 and the Iranian countries long for his advent, for it is
through him that the country will witness a year of plenty or of drought.417

Men and beasts, the waters and all, look eagerly to the rising of the star
Tishtrya, as he will send a flood of rain to fertilize their waste lands with
water and bestow riches upon the earth, if the righteous faithfully offer him
praise and worship.418 The farmer yearns for a few drops of Tishtrya's rain to
moisten his parched fields, the gardener longs for a shower to brighten the
foliage. The land smiles with rich harvests as a result of his fertilizing waters.
414 Yt8.8, 39,40,51-55.
415 Yt8.13,16,18; Vd.19.37.
416 Yt8.35.
417 Yt8.36.
418 Yt8.36,41,42,48.
Tishtrya complains before Ahura Mazda about the indifference of men who
do not sacrifice unto him. When invoked with sacrifice, as are the other
angels, he is willing to hasten to the help of the righteous, whether for a
single night, or two or fifty nights, or even a hundred nights.419 Tishtrya
affirms that owing to his power to further righteousness, he is worthy of
sacrifice and invocation, and if people will offer him libations and Haoma in
sacrifice, he will grant them heroic children, and purity unto their souls, the
riches of oxen and horses.420 He pours down water in abundance upon the
earth, brings prosperity unto the whole creation, when he receives the
offering of a sacrifice and is propitiated, rejoiced, and satisfied.421 Never, in
that event, would the hostile horde invade the countries, nor would any
calamity or evil of any kind befall them.422 Yet in spite of all this, the
bounteous kindness of Tishtrya grants boons to his votary whether he prays
for them or not.423
419 Yt8.11.
420 Yt8.15,17,19.
421 Yt8.43,47.

422 Yt8.56.
423 Yt8.49.
His fight with the demon of drought. Tishtrya is opposed in his work of
producing rain by his adversary Apaosha, the demon of drought, who keeps
back the rain. The Tishtrya Yasht gives a picturesque account of the struggle
between them. [218] In the combat with the fiend that holds the world in
clutch through famine and drought, Apaosha, who appears in the form of a
terrifying black horse, assaults his opponent and in their opening combat
succeeds in forcing Tishtrya to retreat. Worsted by the fiend, Tishtrya
mourns his defeat and complains that men do not sufficiently sacrifice unto
him as they do unto other celestial powers, for had they not been sparing in
their invocation, he would have been able to bring a further strength of ten
horses, of ten camels, of ten oxen, of ten mountains, and of ten rivers to his
side. Ahura Mazda himself, thereupon, offers a sacrifice unto Tishtrya and
thus imparts new strength to him. Thus emboldened, he now, with renewed
vigour, attacks his rival for the second time, and after a fierce struggle
overcomes him. His triumph is hailed as the triumph of the waters, plants,
and the religion of Mazda, for Tishtrya is now in a position to bring
prosperity to the country.424 Ahura Mazda, the Amesha Spentas, as well as
Mithra, Ashi Vanghuhi, and Parendi, are among those that help Tishtrya in
this war of the elements for the benefit of mankind425
424 Yt8.20-29.
425 Yt8.7,38.
VANANT
A star-Yazata. The other important star-Yazata besides Tishtrya who is
classed among the spiritual beings is Vanant. The twentieth Yasht is
composed in his honour. Tradition assigns to him the special work of
guarding the gates of the great Alburz round which the sun, moon and the
stars revolve, and accounts him as the leader of a constellation in the western
heavens in the war against the planets. In the Avestan Yasht bearing this star-

Yazata's name, Vanant is specially invoked to give help to smite the noxious
creatures of Angra Mainyu.426 Some spells to this effect, composed in the
Pazend language, are later appended to this particular Yasht. It is elsewhere
stated in the Avesta that Ahura Mazda has created him,427 and that the
faithful ask him for strength and victory to enable them to remove distress
and tyranny.427a
426 Yt20.1.
427 Yt8.12; Ny1.8.
427a Yt8.12.
[219]
SATAVAESA
An acolyte of Tishtrya. The star Satavaesa is also personified, but his
individuality is very faintly pronounced. He has no Yasht or hymn composed
to glorify him. As an acolyte of Tishtrya, he causes the waters of the sea
Vourukasha to flow down to the seven zones for the nourishment of plants
and animals, and for the fertility and prosperity of the Aryan nations.428
428 Yt8.9; 13.43; Sr. 1.13; 2.13.
HAPTOIRINGA
Another acolyte of Tishtrya. This constellation, Ursa Major, is also raised to
the position of a lesser divinity. Ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine Fravashis watch over this stellar cluster.429 The genius of this star
is invoked to enable mankind to oppose the evil caused by the sorcerers and
fairies.430
429 Yt13.60.
430 Yt8.12; Sr. 2.13.
VAYU

The deification of the wind. Vayu, or Vata, is the Indo-Iranian
impersonation of wind. The terms Vayu and Vata are variously used to
represent either the wind or the genius of wind in both the Rig Veda and in
the Avestan texts. Yet Vayu is chiefly the personification of the wind. As we
have already seen, the whole of the Ram Yasht treats of the exploits of
Raman's comrade Vayu. Vayu's wind is divided into two parts, the good and
the evil. The wind is productive of good, but it also causes harm. That part
of Vayu which is supposed to be the source of harm is branded as evil, and
classed among Angra Mainyu's creations. Hence the faithful take care to
sacrifice unto that part alone of Vayu which is the creation of Spenta
Mainyu.431 The twenty-second day of the month is named after Vayu.432
431 Y22.24; 25.5; Yt15.5,42,57; Sr. 1.21; 2.21.
432 Y16.5.
Vayu’s attributes. The genius of wind is most frequently called 'working on
high.' He strikes terror among all, and [220] fearlessly enters the deepest and
the darkest places to smite the demons.433 He is high-girt, of strong stature,
of high foot, of wide breast, of broad thighs, and of powerful eyes.434 He
wears a golden helm and a golden crown, a golden necklace, and golden
garment; he has golden shoes and a golden girdle; and armed with golden
weapons he rides in a golden chariot rolling on golden wheels.435 A fine
image this, to immortalize Vayu in a golden statue! The poet gives a long list
of the names of Vayu, and is very prolific in ascribing high attributes to him.
In this the ancient composer follows the Yasht dedicated to Ahura Mazda. In
fact Vayu is the only angel who is known, like Ahura Mazda, by many
names. The text enumerates about forty-seven of such titles. Almost all of
these attributes of Vayu are derived from the function of Vayu as wind,
rather than from his activity as the genius of wind. They pertain to the
atmospheric phenomenon more than to the abstract ideas about the angel.
Some of the more important of the names of Vayu are as follows: the
overtaker, the all-vanquishing, the good-doer, the one going forwards and
backwards, the destroyer, smiter, usurper, the most valiant, the strongest, the
firmest, the stoutest, the vanquisher at one stroke, the destroyer of malice,
the liberator, the pervading one, and the glorious.436

433 Yt15.53.
434 Yt15.54.
435 Yt15.57.
436 Yt15.43-48.
Those who offer sacrifices unto Vayu. The recital of his names has a great
efficacy, and Vayu asks Zarathushtra to invoke these names in the thick of
the battle, or when the tyrant and heretic threaten him with their havocking
hordes. The man in heavy fetters finds himself freed upon the recital of these
names.437 Vayu is the greatest of the great and the strongest of the strong.
The text briefly describes how some of the most illustrious personages
invoked Vayu and begged of him various boons, and in this connection we
may recall that Herodotus438 mentions the fact that the Persians sacrificed to
the winds among other divine forces in nature. The list of Vayu's supplicants
in Yasht 15 is headed by Ahura Mazda himself, who desired the boon that he
may smite the creatures of Angra Mainyu, but that none may smite the
creation of Spenta Mainyu.439 Among the kings, renowned heroes. and other
personages who sacrificed [221] unto Vayu, and to whom the angel granted
their boons, are Haoshyangha, Takhma Urupi, Yima, Thraetaona, Keresaspa,
Aurvasara, Hutaosa, and such maidens as are not yet given in marriage.440
Even the wicked Azhi Dahaka begged also of him a boon, but Vayu rejected
his sacrifice.441 Men sacrifice unto Vayu with libations and prayers and ask
for strength to vanquish their adversaries.442 Vayu asks Zarathushtra to
invoke him, in order that neither Angra Mainyu, nor the sorcerers, nor the
demons may be able to injure him.443
437 Yt15.49-52.
438 Herod. 1.131.
439 Yt15.2-4.

440 Yt15.7-17, 23-41.
441 Yt15.19-21.
442 Yt15.1.
443 Yt15.56.
ATAR
The fire cult in Iran. The cult of the sacrificial fire goes back to the IndoEuropean period. The Skt. word agni, 'fire,' has for its equivalent Latin ignis
and Slavonic ogni. The most prominent divinity after Indra in the Vedas is
Agni and more than 200 hymns and several stray passages are devoted to his
glorification. The Iranian word for fire as well as for the Yazata presiding
over fire is Atar. Among both the Indians and the Iranians fire occupies the
central position in all rituals. The priest who tended the fire is known by a
common name among both the peoples. Among the Indians he is atharvan
and among the Iranians âthravan, literally meaning, 'one who tends fire.’ A
litany is composed in honour of Atar and he is celebrated many other
passages. The ninth month of the year and the ninth day of the month are
named after Atar.444 444 Y16.4.
Atar, or Fire, is most frequently called the son of Ahura Mazda in the
Younger Avestan texts. The devout hunger in heart to reach Mazda through
him as a mediary.445 Asha Vahishta’s association with the fire continues and
they are often together. As the most holy symbol of his faith, the house-lord
prays that the sacred element may ever burn in his house.446 We have already
seen that the Avesta speaks of some fires consecrated by the pre-Zoroastrian
kings in Iran. The Avestan works refer to the dâitya gâtu, 'proper place,' for
the fire and the Old Persian Inscriptions speak of the âyadanâ as the places of
worship.447 The bas-relief sculpture at Naksh-i-Rustam [222] over the royal
tomb shows an altar with fire on it. Herodotus, the earliest of the Greek
writers on Persia, however, informs us that the Persians did not erect temples
in his days, but sacrificed unto the elements sun, moon, earth, fire, water,
and wind on the summits of mountains.448 Dino, the contemporary of
Alexander, does not mention the fire-temples and says that the Persians

worshipped in the open air.449 It may be that the early writers did not come
across temples in Iran, in the Greek sense of the term. But there must
certainly have been some kind of structures to protect the sacred fire from
being extinguished. Strabo450 for the first time mentions in Cappadocia
places dedicated to fire, and speaks of enclosures with fire altars in the
centre. No sacrifices, we are told, were offered to any divinity without the
accompaniment of the invocation of fire. These altars, we are further
informed by Strabo, were filled with ashes over which the sacred fire burned
day and night. The Magi, he adds, tended the holy flames, and with
Baresman twigs in their hands daily performed their devotions for about an
hour.451 Pausanias (A.D. 173) corroborates this statement from his personal
observation in Lydia.452 Xenophon and Curtius Rufus acquaint us with the
practice of carrying fire on portable altars in religious processions.453
445 Y36.1.
446 Y62.3; Ny5.9.
447 Bh. 1,14.
448 Herod. 1.131.
449 Cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, Protreptica, 5. 65.1.
450 60 B.C.
451 Strabo, p. 733.
452 Pausanias, 5.27.5,6.
453 Cyropaedia, 8. 3. 11-13; History of Alexander 3. 3. 9; see Edwards, Altar
(Persian) in ERE. 1. 346-348.
Atar is both the genius of fire and the element fire itself. As the fire dwells
in every house, he is constantly spoken of in the Rig Veda as the lord of the
house. The Yasna in the manner calls him the lord of all houses.454 He is the

great Yazata.455 He is the most bountiful,456 of renowned name457 the
beneficent warrior, and full of glory and healing.458 Besides being the angel
that presides over fire, Atar is also fire as such. The two concepts are often so
mixed up together that it becomes difficult to distinguish between the
blazing fire burning upon the [223] altar and the angel that personifies it.
The difficulty is still more increased when we see the fire on the hearth
conceived of as speaking and blessing as a person. The householders pray
that the fire may ever burn and blaze in their houses.459 In the Vedas, Agni is
a friend of the man who entertains him as a guest and feeds him with fuel.460
The fire of Mazda, likewise, solicits devotional offerings from those persons
for whom he cooks the evening and the morning meal, he looks at the hands
of all passers-by, to see if they bring some present for him or not, even as a
friend for a friend. When the faithful bring to him fuel, dry and exposed to
the light, he is propitiated, and in the fulfillment of his wish blesses the
votary with a flock of cattle and a multitude of men, an active mind and an
active spirit, and a joyous life.461 During the three watches of the night Atar
wakes up the master of the house, the husbandman, and calls Sraosh for
help.462 Here also it is not so much the angel Atar that acts, as it is the fire
itself, for the master of the house and the husbandman are asked to wash
their hands and bring fuel to it, lest the demon Azi should extinguish it.463
The man who responds with alacrity, and is the first to wake up and tend the
fire with dry wood, receives Atar's blessings.464 The man who sacrifices unto
fire with fuel in his hand, with the Baresman in his hand, with milk in his
hand, with the mortar for crushing the branches of the sacred Haoma in his
hand, is given happiness.465 Phoenix of Colophon (280 B.C.), cited in
Athenaeus, speaks of the fire ritual of the Magi and mentions the Baresman466
In the litany to the fire, the faithful are enjoined to feed the fire with fuel
that is dry and well exposed to the light,467 and Strabo tells us that the firepriests fed the sacred fire with dry wood, fat, and oil; and he further adds
that some portions of the caul of the sacrificed animal were also placed on
it.468
454 Y17.11.
455 Ny5.4.

456 Y1.2.
457 Vsp. 9.5.
458 Ny5.6; Sr. 1.9; 2.9.
459 Ny5.8, 9.
460 R.V. 4.2.6; 4.10.
461 Y62.7-10; Ny5.13-16.
462 Vd. 18. 18-22.
463 Vd. 18.19-21.
464 Vd. 18.26, 27.
465 Y62.1; Ny5.7.
466 Athenaeus, 12. p. 530.
467 Y62.10; Ny5.16.
468 Strabo, p. 732.
Atar’s boons. Atar is invoked to grant well-being and sustenance in
abundance, knowledge, holiness, a ready tongue, comprehensive, great, and
imperishable wisdom, manly valour, watchfulness, an innate offspring worthy
to sit in the assembly and work for the renown of his house and village, town
and country, [224] and for the glory of his country, name and fame in this
world, as well as the shining, all-happy paradise of the righteous.469 Whoso
does not treat the fire well displeases Ahura Mazda.470 Zarathushtra blesses
King Vishtaspa that he may be as resplendent as the fire.471
469 Y68.4-6; Ny5.10-12.

470 TdFr. 22,23.
471 Yt22.4.
His work. When Mithra goes on his usual round in his golden chariot, Atar
drives behind him along with the other divine personifications.472 Like Agni
who knows the paths leading to the gods,473 Atar shows the most upright
path to those who lie not unto Mithra.474 When Angra Mainyu breaks into
the creation of righteousness, Atar in company with Vohu Manah opposes
the malice of the Evil Spirit.475 When Yima, reft of his senses through the
Kingly Glory, revolts from Ahura Mazda, the Glory departs from him and he
falls to destruction.476 It can well be imagined that the monster Azhi Dahaka
should strive to capture the departed Glory, but Atar intervenes and
vanquishes him.477 472 Ytl0.127.
473 RV. 10.98.11.
474 Yt10.3.
475 Yt13.77,78.
476 Yt19.34-36, 38.
477 Yt19.46-50.
What causes grief to Atar. Angra Mainyu has created the inexpiable crime of
burning or cooking dead matter,478 and the Vendidad enjoins capital
punishment for those who commit it.479 We are informed that the Persians
considered it a mortal sin to defile fire by blowing it with the mouth, or by
burning dead matter over it.480 The Achaemenian monarch Cambyses roused
the indignation of his countrymen when he burnt the corpse of King Amasis
at Sais.481 It is, therefore, a crime to bring back fire into a house in which a
man has died, within nine nights in winter and a month in summer.482 Highly
meritorious is the deed of bringing to the fire altar the embers of a fire
desecrated by dead matter, and great shall be the doer's reward in the [225]

next world, when his soul has parted from his body483 Elaborate rules are
accordingly laid down for the purification of the fire defiled by the dead.484
There is no purification for the man who carries a corpse to the fire.485 In the
case of every pollution of the pure element. Atar is inexorable.
478 Vd. 1.16.
479 Vd. 8.73, 74.
480 Strabo, p. 732; Ctesias, Persica, 57; Nicolas Damascenus, Frag. 68; FHG.
3.409.
481 Herodotus, 3.16.
482 Vd. 5.43,44.
483 Vd. 8.81,82.
484 Vd. 8.73-80.
485 Vd. 7.25-27.
NAIRYOSANGHA
Mazda's celestial herald. Nairyosangha corresponds to the Vedic
Narashamsa, generally applied to Agni as his epithet. He is expressly spoken
of as a Yazata,486 and is well-shaped.487 Like Agni who is often called the
messenger of gods between heaven and earth, Nairyosangha is the
messenger of Ahura Mazda.488 When the Evil Spirit introduces disease and
death in the world, Ahura Mazda dispatches him as his envoy to Airyaman to
come with his healing remedies.489 He is invoked along with Atar, for he is
Atar's associate. He is termed the offspring of sovereignty490 and as such he is
entitled to go in Mithra's chariot with Sraosha.491 He has his Fravashi.492
486 Y17.11.
487 Y57.3.

488 Vd. 19.34.
489 Vd. 22.7, 13.
490 Y17.11; Ny5.6.
491 Yt10. 52.
492 Yt13, 85.
ARDVI SURA ANAHITA
The angel of waters. Ardvi Sura, who bears the standing epithet anâhita,
'undefiled,' is the name of a mythical river as well as that of the female
divinity of the waters. She resides in the starry regions.493 This deity of the
heavenly stream gets recognition of the Achaemenian kings, and is included
in the extremely short list of the Iranian divinities expressly mentioned in
their inscriptions.494 Classical writers speak of her sanctuaries founded at
Pasargadae, Ecbatana, Kangavar and other places.495 At a very early date her
cult migrates to distant countries and is there assimilated to Artemis,
Aphrodite, Athene-Minerva, Hera, Magna Mater, Ishtar, and Nanaia.496 She
overleaps the barriers [226] of Mount Alburz and gains her votaries in the
far-off lands of East and West, where occasionally her cult degenerates into
obscene rites. Herodotus who confuses her with Mithra says that her cult
came to Iran from the Semites of Assyria and Arabia.497 493 Yt5.85, 88, 132.
494 Art. Sus. a; Ham.
495 See Gray, op cit., p. 57, 58; Fox and Pemberton, op. cit., 34-39, 58, 66, 68,
79.
496 Gray, ib., p. 57.
497 Herod. 1.131.
She is celebrated in one of the longest Yashts and In 65th chapter of the

Yasna. She is described as the most courageous, strong, of noble origin,498
good, and most beneficient.499 Ahura Mazda has assigned to her the work of
guarding the creation, like a shepherd guarding his fiock.500 The eighth of
the year and the tenth day of the month are named after waters of Ardvi
Sura.501
498 Yt5.15.
499 Yt5.130, 131.
500 Yt5.6, 89.
501 Y16.4.
Her image in words found in the texts, corresponds with her statue in
stone. The text gives a fine descriptive image of the female deity. She is a
maiden of fair body, well-shaped, pure, courageous, tall, bright, beautiful,
and glorious. Upon her head she wears a golden crown studded with a
hundred stars and beautifully adorned, square golden earrings adorn her ears,
a golden necklace decorates her neck, she wears a golden mantle, she has
tightly girded her waist so that her beautiful breasts come out prominently,
her white arms graced by elegant bracelets are stouter than a horse, she
wears golden shoes, a rich garment of gold or of the skin of the beavers.502
Pliny says that a statue made of solid gold was set up in the temple of
Anaitis.503 We have already seen on the authority of Berosus that Artaxerxes
Mnemon (B.C. 404-358) introduced the worship of the images of Anahita
among the Persians.504
502 Yt5.7, 15, 64, 78, 123, 126-129.
503 Historia Naturalis, 33, 4 (24) 82f.
504 Cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, Protreptica, 5, 65, 3; Jackson, Images and
Idols (Persian) in ERE. 7. 151-155; cf. Cumont, Anâhita, in ERE. 1. 414, 415.
Ahura Mazda heads the list of the sacrificers who entreat her for various

boons. The Yasht dedicated to Ardvi Sura Anahita furnishes us with the
names of those who have sacrificed unto her and begged of her various
boons. The number of her supplicants exceeds that of any other angel. Ahura
Mazda and Zarathushtra invoke her, with Haoma and Baresman, with spells
[227] and libations, whereas the majority of her other votaries severally offer
her a hundred stallions, a thousand oxen, and ten thousand sheep.
Haoshyangha, Yima, Thraetaona, Keresaspa, Kavi Usa, Haosravah, Tusa,
Vafra Navaza, Jamaspa, Ashavazdah, the son of Pourudakhshti, and
Ashavazdah and Thrita, the sons of Sayuzhdri, Vistauru, Yoishta, the
members of the Hvova and Naotara families, Vishtaspa, and Zairi-vairi are all
granted their diverse boons. These ask for sovereignty over all countries,
victory on the battlefield, power to smite the adversaries in battle, to rout the
sorcerers and fairies, the fiends and the demons; they pray likewise for bodily
health, wisdom to answer the riddles of heretics, and for riches and swift
horses.505 The boon that Ahura Mazda seeks is that he may win over
Zarathushtra to think after his reljgion, to speak after his religion, and to act
after his religion; the prophet in turn begs of her that he may gain to his side
the mighty King Vishtaspa as a patron to embrace his religion.506 The rulers
and chiefs invoke her that they may defeat their enemies and smite the
demons, sorcerers, and fairies, the warriors beg of her swift horses and bodily
health and glory, the priests and their disciples pray for knowledge, the
maids beseech her to grant them strong husbands.507 Ardvi Sura Anahita
bestows fruitfulness to women; she purifies the seeds of all males and the
wombs of all females for bearing. Shes, as a divine bestower, gives easy
childbirth to all females, and gives them right and timely milk.508 Ardvi Sura
likewise grants boons unto all, because it lies in her power to do so. The
sacrificing priest implores her to come down from the stars to the sacrificial
altar, and to grant riches, horses, chariots, swords, food, and plenty to
men.509 She gives health and increases flocks, possessions, and wealth.510
505 Yt5.21-27, 33-39, 45-55, 61-83, 98, 108-114.
506 Yt5.17-19, 104-106.
507 Yt5.85-87.

508 Y65.2; Yt5.2, 87; Ny4.3; Vd. 7.16.
509 Yt5. 130-132.
510 Y65.1; Yt5.1.
She reluses to concede the wicked persons their wishes. Azhi Dahaka
wickedly besought her to grant him a boon that he may make all the seven
zones empty of men, and the Turanian Franrasyan sought her favour to
secure the Glory, and the sons of Vaesaka implored her to grant that they
may smite the Aryan [228] nation by tens of thousands and myriads; Arejataspa and Vandaremainish craved for the defeat of King Vishtaspa, Zairivairi,
and the Aryan nation; but Ardvi Sura Anahita refused to grant the evil wishes
to these national foes of Iran.511
511 Yt5.29-31, 41-43, 57-59, 116-118.
The offerings of libations. Ardvi Sura Anahita desires that men invoke her
with libations and Haoma;512 these libations are to be drunk by the priest
who is well versed in religious lore, and not by any wicked and deformed
person.513 The faithful are to bring libations unto her at any time between
the rising and the setting of the sun. Those brought to her after sunset do
not reach her; on the contrary, they go to the demons, who revel in these
misdirected offerings.514 We are informed that the man who dedicates these
libations before sunrise or after sunset does no better deed than if he should
pour them down into the jaws of a venomous snake.515 Besides invoking
Ardvi Sura Anahita as the Yazata of water, the waters themselves are
collectively invoked to grant boons. Zarathushtra is asked to offer a libation
to the waters and to ask from them riches, power, and worthy offspring,516 a
happy and a joyful abode in this world and the next, accompanied by riches
and glory.517 The faithful pray that these waters may not be for those of evil
thoughts, evil words, evil deeds, and evil religion, neither for the tormentors
of their friends, neighbours, relatives, and priests.518 Nor may they be for
their evil-wishers,519 nor for thieves and robbers, murderers and sorcerers,
buriers of the dead, jealous and niggard, and heretics and wicked persons.520

512 Yt5.8, 11, 123, 124.
513 Yt5.92, 93.
514 Yt5.94, 95; Nr. 68.
515 Nr. 48.
516 Y65.11.
517 Y68.13, 14, 21.
518 Y65.6.
519 Y65.7.
520 Y65.8.
Animal sacrifices to Anahita. Strabo relates the mode of sacrificing to the
waters. The sacrificial animal, we are told, is taken to the bank of a river or a
lake; a ditch is formed into which the animal is killed. The pieces of meat are
then placed on myrtle or laurel, and holding tamarisk twigs in his hands, the
priest pours oil mixed with honey and milk on the ground and chants the
sacred formulas. Great care is taken that no drop [229] of blood falls into the
water while the animal is being immolated; nor must the mixture of oil,
honey, and milk be poured into water.521 This precaution is taken lest the
waters be defiled.
521 Strabo, p.732.
Any defilement of the waters evokes Ardvi Sura's displeasure. It is sinful to
contaminate the waters. Such an act incurs great displeasure on the part of
the genius of waters. Those who wilfully bring dead matter to the waters
become unclean for ever and ever.522 If a man while walking or running,
riding or driving, happens to see a corpse ftoating in a river, he must enter
the river and go down into the water ankle-deep, knee-deep, waist-deep, nay

even a man's full depth if need be, and take out the decaying body and place
it upon the dry ground exposed to the light of the sun.523 Herodotus informs
us that the Persians do not make water, wash or bathe in a river.524
522 Vd.7.25-27.
523 Vd.6.26-29.
524 Herod. 1.138.
Ardvi Sura's chariot. Like some of the Yazatas, Ardvi Sura Anahita has a
chariot of her own, in which she drives forth in majesty. She holds the reins
in her own hands, and controls four great chargers who are all of white color,
of the same stock, and who smite the malice of all tyrants, demons, wicked
men, sorcerers, fairies, oppressors, as well as those who are wilfully blind and
wilfully deaf.525 The text enables us to understand the allegorical statement
regarding the steeds that are yoked to her chariot, for we are told that the
four chargers of Ardvi Sura are the wind, the rain, the cloud, and the sleet;
and it was Ahura Mazda who made them for her.526
525 Yt5.11, 13.
526 Yt5.120.
APAM NAPAT
His nature and work. This Indo-Iranian divinity of waters seems very early
to have been eclipsed by Anahita, who remains the chief genius presiding
over waters in the cult. Apam Napat's Vedic counterpart has an aqueous as
well as an igneous nature. In the association of the Avestan Apam Napat with
the fire angel Nairyosangha, Spiegel sees traces of this secondary nature.527
Apam Napat literally means 'the offspring of waters,' and, like [230] the
Vedic genius, lives beneath the waters.528 He is the exalted lord and
sovereign, the shining one, and the swift-horsed.529 The waters are addressed
as females. Apam Napat in the Vedas is nourished by females.530 The Avestan
texts speak of him as the lord of females.531 He is the most prompt to
respond when invoked,532 and co-operates with Vayu and distributes the

waters on earth.533 He furthers the riches of the countries and allays
misfortunes;534 and when the Kingly Glory escapes from the contest of Atar
and Azhi Dahaka to the sea Vourukasha it is Apam Napat who takes and
protects it.535 This Yazata is also credited with having made and shaped
men.536
527 Arische Periode, 192, 193, Leipzig, 1887; see Gray, Apam Napat, in Archiv
für Religionswissenschaft, vol. 3, p. 18-51; and in The Foundations of the Iranian
Religions, p. 133-136.
528 Yt19.52; RV. 8.43.9.
529 Y1.5; 2.5; 65.12; 70.6; Yt5.72; 19.51.
530 RV. 2.35. 3, 5.
531 Yt5.72; 19.52.
532 Yt19.52.
533 Yt8.34.
534 Yt13. 95.
535 Yt19.51.
536 Yt19.52.
AHURANI
Another water genius. A female Yazata, though of no great importance, is
Ahurani, corresponding to the Vedic Varunani. She impersonates the
Ahurian waters.537 She is invoked in company with the sea Vourukasha and
other waters.538 The faithful devotee prays that if he has offended her in any
way, he is ready to expiate his sin by an offering of the libations.539 She is
implored to descend in person and grace the sacrifice with her presence and
be propitiated by it.540 She is likewise invited to come with her gifts of

health, prosperity, renown, the enlightenment of thoughts, words, and
deeds, and for the well-being of the soul.541 She is asked to give offspring
that will further the prosperity of the house, village, town, and country and
add to the renown of the country.542 Riches and glory, endurance and vigour
of body, a long life and the shining, all-happy abode of the righteous are the
boons that the devout ask from her.543 The libations offered her are the most
excellent and the fairest, and are filtered by pious men.544 Good thoughts,
good words, and good deeds also serve as her libations.545 The libations
offered [231] to Ahurani cause joy to Ahura Mazda and the Amesha
Spentas.546
537 Y38.3.
538 Y68.6.
539 Y68.1.
540 Y68.9.
541 Y68.3, 4.
542 Y68.5.
543 Y68.11.
544 Ny1.18.
545 Y68.3.
546 Y66.1.
ZAM
The earth deified. The Avestan term for earth is zam, from which the angel
Zam, or Zamyat, derives her name. Her personality is very insipid as
compared with Armaiti, who, as we have seen, has the earth under her care
and is, in fact, a more active guardian genius of the earth than Zamyat. The

twenty eighth day of every month is sacred to Zamyat.547 The poet who
composed the Yasht in honour of Zamyat does not sing the glory of his
heroine, but occupies himself rather with a description of the mountains of
the world,548 and with the celebration of the Divine Glory that descends
upon the Aryan race, symbolizing the greatness of the kings and the
consecrated piety of the sainted souls.549 Cyrus, says Xenophon, sacrificed
animals to the earth as the Magians directed.550

[232]
CHAPTER XXIII
FRAVASHIS
The divine double in man. The belief in a double of
the living and dead, animate or inanimate things,
which influences the objects or persons has prevailed
among different peoples from primitive times.
The Egyptians believed in man's higher double
whom they named Ka. The Ka, in the early period of
history, was supposed to belong only to the kings,
but later all human beings were believed to possess it.
At the individual's death he went to his Ka who
interceded for him with God, provided him with
food and looked after his welfare and protection.
In the Vedas the disembodied spirits are called the
1 RV. 8.48.13.
pitrs or the Fathers. Two hymns are dedicated to
2 RV. 7.76.4.
them. They live in the third heaven. Their abode,
which is situated in the south, is called pitrloka. They
have extended to heaven and earth with Soma,1 and 3 RV.10.15.l0.
inhabit earth, air, and heaven. They feast with the
4 RV. 10.68.11.
gods,2 and ride on the celestial car with Indra and
3
other gods. They adorn the sky with stars and give
5 RV. 7.33.1; 10.15.8.
light and darkness.4 They are divided into lower,
higher, and middle grades and are classed as earlier or
later. They are invoked collectively,5 or individually.6 6 RV. 1.36.18.
They are invited to come with Yama, Vivasvat, and
7 RV. 10.15.10, 11.
Agni to partake of the offerings. They come in
7
thousands to the sacrificial repast. They are fond of
Soma.8 They are asked to give riches, offering, and 8 RV. 10.15.1, 5, 6.
long life to their sons.9 They are implored to help,

intercede, and protect their worshippers and not to
harm their descendants.10

9 RV. 10.15.7-11;
AthV. 18.3.14; 4.62
10 RV. 10.15.2, 5, 6.

[233] Plato taught that the sensual objects that
constitute the world were but the imperfect copies or
reproductions of the quasi-personified Ideas that
constituted true reality. These transcendental Ideas
the contents of the creative mind of God. This
supreme Deity creates the World-Soul, whom we
have equated with Spenta Mainyu in previous pages.
The Avestan text says the Fravashis stood ready for
help, when Spenta Mainyu created the world with
Angra Mainyu.11 It is expressly said in a passage that
the souls of the dead that have become the Fravashis
of the righteous owe their origin to Spenta Mainyu
and to Best Mind.12 Plato likewise says that the
World-Soul who bears the images of the Ideas,
fashioned the World-Body or the creatures after the
pattern of the Ideas.

11 Yt13.28, 29, 76.
12 Yt22.39, 40; see
also Kanga, A New
Interpretation of the Spenta
Mainyu of the Gathas ....
the Progenitor of Fravashis
in the Avesta ....
Bombay, 1933.

Aristotle postulated a second independent principle
in addition to the soul which moved the body and
carried on rational activity. This is the spirit which
constitutes the real essence of the individual. Man is
thus divided into body, soul, and spirit.
Philo distinguishes between the soul and the pneuma.
This pneuma which the Platonists, Aristotelians, and
Stoics of his time call Nous, is the image of the deity
and constitutes the true nature of man. The
transcendent God reveals himself through the divine 13 Yt13.17.
Ideas which are his thoughts and will, in the form of
creative forces. As the Fravashis are not classed
among the Yazatas, so these divine Ideas, says Philo,
are not angels, but are personified abstract ideas.

They manifest the energy of God. The Fravashis, as
we shall see anon, help Ahura Mazda in the
maintenance of the world, so these Ideas administer
the work of God. They impart reality to the creation.
Order in the creation is preserved through them. The
Fravashis are not all of equal grade,13 so these Ideas
also are not of equal rank. The Fravashi represents
Ahura Mazda in man, so does the rational part of the
soul stand for the type of the Logos. Plutarch speaks
of two principles in man, the spirit and the soul. The
spirit, he says, is immortal, whereas the soul is not. In
the Book of the Wisdom of Solomon, Wisdom, an
emanation of God, selects from the divine Ideas those
that are fit for actualization and creates them.
[234]The dead, according to the early Roman belief,
were gathered to a group of spirits called Di Manes.
The idea of the Genius or the divine double
accompanying every individual during his lifetime
arose in the period of the Republic. The Genius lived
with the individual as long as he lived. At death he
lost his individuality and was gathered to the Di
Manes. Under Greek influence the idea of
individuality developed. The idea arose that the
Genius lived after death. Di Manes became
individualized protecting spirits instead of an
individualized group. During the lifetime of man his
Genius was divine, after his death the Genius
continued to live as one of the Manes. During
lifetime the Genius received divine honours, after
death his Manes received offerings as a God. The
Manes came down to earth and influenced the living
members of the families among whom they had lived.
They required propitiation.
Numenius of Apamea, writing in the second century, 14 Y16.7; 26.7, 11;

speaks of two souls in man. The one is rational and 71.23; Yt22.39.
the other is irrational. The great Alexandrian
theologian Origen (A.D. 185-254) speaks of the
twofold psychic division of man. He says with others
that man is endowed with a soul and a spirit. He then
explains the relation between the soul and the spirit,
which exactly resembles that between a man's soul
and his Fravashi in the Avestan texts. The Fravashi of
a man serves as an ideal, which the soul has to
endeavour to realize. The soul has to strive after,
imitate and emulate its Fravashi and ultimately
become one with it after death. The texts speak of
the souls of the dead that are the Fravashis of the
righteous.14 Origen's teachings help us to understand
the final identity of the soul and the Fravashi. The
spirit, he says, is like unto a master or director of the
soul during lifetime. It applauds or accuses the soul
for its good or bad deed, and reminds it of its duty. If
the soul behaves according to the dictates of the
spirit, it ultimately becomes the spirit, but if it revolts
from the spirit, it remains divided from the spirit,
when the bodily life of the individual ends. The soul,
he says, is the spirit in the process of redemption. It
has therefore to put off its nature as soul and become
spiritual.
What are the Fravashis. A class of higher
intelligences playing a most prominent part in the
Mazdayasnian pantheon, and receiving sacrifices and
adoration from the world of humanity, [235] is that
of the Fravashis, or guardian spirits and prototypes of
mankind in its purest creation. The Gathas do not
mention these beings, but the word fravashi, or
fravarti, has a corresponding form in the Persian
name of the Median King Phraortes (647 B.C.), and
also of the Median rebel mentioned in the Behistan

15 Bh. 2.24, 31, 32,
35; 4.52.
16 Y37.3.
17 Y16.5.

inscription of Darius.15 The Yasna Haptanghaiti
mentions them for the first time.16 One of the longest
of the Yashts is dedicated to the Fravashis. The last
ten days of the year, including the five intercalary
days, are specially set apart for their cult. Besides, the
nineteenth day of every month is consecrated to their
memory,17 and the first month of the Iranian calendar
receives its name after them.
The Fravashis, we have seen, resemble the Vedic
Pitrs, the Roman Manes, or the Platonic Ideas. True
though it is that they share some common traits with
these and have striking resemblances to them, yet,
after all, they are not wholly the same as these. The
manifold nature of their cult offers a complicated and
stubborn problem to students of Iranian theology.
Primarily, the Fravashis constitute a world of
homonyms of the earthly creations, and they have
lived as conscious beings in the empyrean with Ahura
Mazda from all eternity. The multifarious objects of
this world are so many terrestrial duplicates of these
celestial originals. The Fravashis constitute the
internal essence of things, as opposed to the
contingent and accidental. Earthly creations are so
many imperfect copies of these types. They are the
manifestations of the energy of Ahura Mazda. When
nothing existed and Ahura Mazda lived in his sublime
singleness, he had the ideas, concepts of the material
and spiritual creation which he contemplated
creating in time. We have recognized the projection
and manifestation of his will and thought and the
emanation of his creative mind as Spenta Mainyu.
Origen, the Alexandrian philosopher, is right when
he says that the Logos represents the sum total of the
world-thoughts of God. Spenta Mainyu is the

embodiment of Ahura Mazda’s prototypal ideas
which are called Fravashis in the Avestan texts.
Creation is the materialization of these idealized
contents of his mind and through him of Ahura
Mazda's mind. [236] These idealized contents of the
divine mind are the Fravashis and the creatures are
their feeble replicas. The Fravashis are not mere
abstractions of thought, but have objective existence
and work as spiritual entities in heaven, like the
angels and the archangels, until they come down to
this earth voluntarily, as we may infer through later
statements in the Pahlavi texts. They migrate to this
world, and are immanent in the particular bodies that
come into being after their divine images.
Everything that bears the hall-mark of belonging to
the good creation has its Fravashi. Every object
which has a name, common or proper, is endowed
with a Fravashi. Ahura Mazda, the father of all
existence, has his Fravashi, and so have the Amesha
Spentas and the Yazatas.18 Ahera Mazda's Fravashi is
the greatest, the best, the most beautiful, the most
courageous, the most wise, the most efficacious, the
most righteous.19 Even the sky, waters, earth, plants,
animals, and all objects of the kingdom of goodness,
are not without their special Fravashis.20 Thus
beginning from the supreme godhead down to the
tiniest shrub growing in the wilderness, every object
has this divine element implanted in it. It is only
Angra Mainyu and the demons, who are evil by
nature, that are without it.
As Spenta Mainyu is not a personal being, he has no
Fravashi. On the other hand he seems to us to be the
Fravashi of Ahura Mazda.21 The ideal of Fravashi
implies imperfection in the person to whom it

18 Y23.2; Yt13.80, 82,
85.
19 Y26.2.
20 Yt13.74, 86.

21 See my article
Ahura Mazda's Fravashi
in The Indo-Iranian
Studies in honor of Darab

belongs. Man becomes perfect when his soul realizes Sanjana, p. 115, 116.
and reaches its Fravashi. It is the same with the
heavenly beings. Vohu Manah realizes his Fravashi,
when he smites Aka Manah that stands for his
imperfection. Vahishta will reach perfection when he
will ultimately rout Druj. Ahura Mazda has
contemplated, devised a perfect world of which the
symbol is Spenta Mainyu. The world is yet evolving
towards the perfect state which Ahura Mazda has
thought out. Ahura Mazda, therefore, will realize his
Fravashi or Spenta Mainyu, when Angra Mainyu, the
father of imperfection, will perish and the world will
be a new world, a better world, a perfect world, an
ideal world.
[237] During the lifetime of the individual, his
Fravashi accompanies him to this earth. When a
child is born its Fravashi that has existed from all
eternity now comes down to this earth as the higher 22 Y26.4; 55.1.
double of the child's soul. The soul is the ego proper,
the real I-ness. Every individual soul is accompanied
by its Fravashi.22
This Fravashi acts as a guardian spirit, a true friend,
and an unerring guide of the soul. Here is the divine
voice of an infallible monitor who now advises and
now admonishes the soul, now applauds its action,
and now raises a voice of warning at a threatening
spiritual danger. This divine agent in man, we may
infer, sits enthroned by the side of the soul as an ideal
ever attracting the soul towards herself. This ideal
goal is the one towards which the soul should strive.
Though living in the tabernacle of clay on earth with
the soul, and in the midst of the storms of passion
and vice, the Fravashi remains unaffected and
untouched, ever pure and ever sinless. From the time

the soul embarks on its unknown voyage to this
world, as we can judge from Zoroastrian teachings,
its Fravashi leads it, day and night, to the path of
safety, and warns it of the rocks and shoals, storms
and cyclones. If it is off the track, the Fravashi hoists
the danger signal. The bark moves smoothly so long
as the soul follows the wise counsels of its guide. But
as soon as it revolts from the heavenly pilot, it
exposes the bark to danger at every turn. The vessel
now drifts along on the unmapped ocean without any
one at the helm to direct it to the right course, is
tossed on the roaring waves, is left to the mercy of
the changing wind, and is in danger of being
wrecked.
The soul alone is responsible for the good or evil
deeds done in this world, and it receives reward or
retribution in the next world according to its desert.
At the death of the individual when the soul thus
advances to meet its fate, its guardian Fravashi returns
to the celestial realm, but lives now an individualized
life as the Fravashi of a certain person who has lived
his short span of life on earth.
Qualities of the Fravashis. The Fravashis are usually 23 Yt13.75.
designated as the good, valiant, and holy. They are
the liberal, the most valiant, the most holy, the most 24 Yt13.23, 24.
powerful, the most mighty, the most effective.23 They
25 Yt13.30.
are the swiftly moving when [238] invoked, the
24
bestowers of victory, health, and glory. Their
friendship is good and lasting, and they are beautiful, 26 Yt13.31.
health-giving, of high renown, and vanquishing in
27 Yt13.32.
battle.25 They are efficacious, the most beneficent,
and the smiters of the arms of the tyrant foes.26 They
28 Yt13.26, 45.
are girt with the blessings of piety as wide as the
27
earth. as long as a river, and as high as the sun.

They are the strongest in moving onwards, the least 29 Yt13.64.
failing wielders of weapons, the invulnerable, the
shield-bearing, clad with iron helmets and weapons.28
Their power and efficiency are simply inconceivable
and beyond description.29
Their work. Like the higher celestial beings, the
Fravashis are allotted their respective tasks in the
creation of Ahura Mazda. They are the ones who
stood ready for help to the godhead when the two
spirits first met to create the universe.30 It is through
them that Ahura Mazda maintains the sky and the
earth.31 Ahura Mazda expressly is stated as saying
that, had they not rendered him help, animals and
men could not have continued to exist, because the
wicked Druj would have smitten them to death,
except for the guardianship of the Fravashis.32 The
waters flow, and the plants spring forth, and the
winds blow through their glory.33 Through their
radiance and glory females conceive offspring, and
have easy childbirth.34 Through them it is that Ahura
Mazda forms and develops the organs of child in the
womb of its mother, and protects it from death;35
moreover, patriotic sons destined to win distinction
are born unto women on their account.36 They first
gave movement to the waters that stood for a long
time without flowing.37 The trees that stood without
growing began to grow, and the stars and the moon
and the sun that had stood motionless, owing to the
opposition of demons, received their movement
through them38 and have ever since gone along their
paths of progress owing to the influence of the
Fravashis.39 They protect the river Ardvi Sura
Anahita40 and watch over the sea Vourukasha and the
stars [239] Haptoiringa.41 They uphold the sky and
the waters, and the earth and the cattle, and preserve

30 Yt13.76.
31 Yt13.1, 2, 9, 22,
28, 29.
32 Yt13.12, 13.
33 Yt13.14.
34 Yt13.15.
35 Yt13.11, 22.
36 Yt13.16.
37 Yt13.53, 54.
38 Yt13.55-58.
39 Yt13.16.
40 Yt13.4.
41 Yt13.59, 60.
42 Y23.1.

the lives of the children.42
Fravashis help the living. These spiritual forces wield
great power in both the worlds, rendering great help
to those who invoke them, and keeping watch and
ward about the abodes in which they once had lived.
In the field of battle, moreover, they help the
fighting armies to victory. Awful and vanquishing in
battle, they smite and rout the foes, and bring
43 Yt13.40.
triumph unto those who invoke them.43 The heroes
invoke them to succour them in the battle.44 When
44 Yt13.23, 27.
the ruling chief who finds himself in danger on the
battlefield invokes them with offerings, they come
45 Yt13.63, 69-72.
flying unto him like winged birds and fight gallantly
in his behalf against his foes. They become to him a
46 Yt13.40.
weapon and a shield; they guard him on every side,
protecting him with the strength that a thousand men
47 Yt13.33.
would use in guarding one man, so that neither
sword, nor club, nor arrow, nor spear, nor any stone
48 Yt13. 48.
may injure him.45 They rush down in great numbers
in the thick of the battle to crush the foes.46 They
49 Yt13.35.
cause havoc in the battlefield, and smite the malice of
the demons and wicked men.47 The nations against
50 Yt13.47.
whom the Fravashis march are smitten by their fifties,
and hundreds, and thousands, and tens of thousands,
51 Yt13.39.
and myriads.48 Both the vanquisher who pursues his
foe and the vanquished who flees from the field
52 Yt13. 65-68.
invoke them to grant them swiftness in running.49
The Fravashis turn to help that side which has first
53 Y60.4.
invoked them with uplifted hands and heart-felt
devotion.50 They hasten for help to the righteous, but
for harm to the wicked.51 They are ever anxious to
aid their kindred and countrymen, and they give
course to the waters so that they may flow to the
land they inhabited during their lifetime.52 The
householders pray that the august Fravashis may

come to their houses with blessings of righteousness
as wide as the earth, as long as the rivers, and as high
as the sun.53
Ahura Mazda advises Zarathushtra to invoke them
for help whenever he finds himself in danger.54 When
the supplicant needs help of some specific nature, he
invokes the Fravashi of [240] one whom he knows to
be specially endowed with the corresponding virtue 54 Yt13.19, 20.
during his lifetime. For instance, Yima's Fravashi is
55 Yt13.130.
invoked to enable one to withstand drought and
55
death, because that illustrious king is reported to
have driven away these calamities from his kingdom. 56 Yt13. 31; WFr.2. 2.
The Fravashi of king Thraetaona who is generally
57 Yt13.104, 105,
confounded by the later writers with Thrita, the
reputed inventor of medicine, is invoked for help
132-138.
56
against itches, fevers, and other diseases. Similarly
the Fravashis of other great men are invoked for help
in the respective sphere in which they are believed to
have been conspicuous during their lives.57
Fravashis of the dead long for sacrifices. These are
eager to communicate with the living among whom
they have lived on this earth. They desire that their
descendants and kindred shall not forget them. They
seek their praise and prayer, sacrifice and
58 Yt13.49, 50.
invocation.58 They come down flying from their
heavenly abode to the earth on the last ten days of
the Zoroastrian calendar, which are especially
consecrated to them, and interest themselves in the
welfare of the living.
59 Yt13.51, 52.
Fravashis bless if satisfied, but curse when
offended. The Fravashis are entreated by the living to
60 Yt13.31.
be propitious to them. They are besought to come
down from the heavenly regions to the sacrifices held
61 Yt13.30

in their honour. If they are propitiated with offerings,
62 Yt13.156, 157.
they bless their supplicants with riches and flocks,
horses and chariots, and with offspring who will serve
God and their country.59 Those who piously solicit 63 Yt13.145,147.
their benediction receive these in abundance, for the
Fravashis bring down unto them from the spiritual
64 Y60.4.
world the very best of blessings. But those who
neglect or offend them are cursed; and their curse is 65 Yt13.18.
terrible indeed. It brings untold harm to the family.
Loving as the Fravashis are when propitiated, they
become dreadful when offended.60 Yet they never
harm until they are vexed.61 The wise, therefore,
propitiate them to gain their goodwill, and placate
them to allay their wrath. The householder prays that
they may walk satisfied in his house, that they may
not depart offended from his abode, but may leave
the house in joy, carrying the sacrifice and prayer to
Ahura Mazda and the [241] Amesha Spentas.62 They
are implored to accept the offerings and be
propitiated thereby.63 They are asked to come with
riches as widespread as the earth, as vast as the rivers,
as high as the sun, in order to help the righteous and
harm the wicked.64 Those who honour them attain to
power and greatness.65
Fravashis of the righteous ones of one's family,
clan, town, or country invoked individually. The
survivors of the dead commemorate the pious
memory of their departed ancestors. The members of
a family sacrifice unto their elders, the citizens laud
their patriots and heroes, and the devout revere the
sacred memory of their sainted dead. The latter part
of the Yasht that is consecrated to the Fravashis treats
of the great personalities of Iran that have illumined
the pages of her history in various ways. The
Fravashis of the righteous men as well as women of

all times and places who have worked for the
furtherance of righteousness, and who have
contributed to the welfare of mankind are constantly
commemorated.
Fravashis of the righteous ones of all ages and all
places invoked collectively. These celestial beings
are invoked in a body by the faithful. The supplicant
generally winds up his prayers by announcing that he
sacrifices unto the Fravashis of the righteous from the 66 Yt13.145.
time of the first man, Gaya Maretan, up to the time
of the advent of Saoshyant at the end of the world.66 67 Y24.5; 26.6; Vsp.
11.7; Yt13.21.
Not only are the Fravashis of the departed ones
commemorated, but those of living persons, as well as
those of persons that are-still to be born in future
ages, are also equally honoured with praise and
invocation.67
In addition to this, the righteous ones of all the
Aryan countries, nay what is still more, even those
who are righteous among the Turanians, the national
68 Yt13.143.
foes of the Iranians, receive their share in this
68
homage to the saintly ones. The commemoration
69 Yt13.144.
list ends with explicitly mentioning the righteous
69
ones of all countries of the world. The individual is
70 Herod. 1. 132.
thus taught to recognize the fellowship with the
human beings of all ages and all [242] places.
Herodotus attests that a Persian does not pray for
himself, but for the whole nation and his king.70
The faithful may infer from the spirit that runs
through the Zoroastrian scriptures that there are no
breaks in the life story of humanity. Each individual is
a unit in the long line of countless generations
between the first and the last man. He realizes his
individuality in his own age and place. Each

generation is the product of the past and parent of
the future. It finds itself placed in the midst of
religious, social, economical, and political institutions
of the past and inherits the accumulated heritage of
the wisdom and civilization of the collective
humanity that has lived before it. The past has made
the present in body, mind, and spirit; and the present
has to make the future physically, mentally, and
spiritually. No generation can live exclusively by
itself and for itself. To the past it owes a deep debt of
gratitude, to the future it is bound by parental duty. A
wise parent instinctively works for the good of his
children, and no age can be regardless of the material
and spiritual welfare of those that are to follow it in
time. Each age has its righteous persons by the
million, who further the human progress. The
Fravashis of such only are commemorated. Those
that have willfully chosen to tread the path of
wickedness and hamper the onward march of
humanity towards perfection do not share this
honour, the highest that collective humanity confers
upon its dutiful children of all ages and places. The
Pneuma, likewise, in the New Testament is not
associated with unrighteous persons.
Dual nature of the Zoroastrian ancestor-worship.
The commemoration of the Fravashis of the dead
represents but one phase of ancestor-worship. As we
have already seen, the spiritual prototype of man is
something apart from and above his soul. It is the
soul that constitutes the individuality of his person,
and it is natural for the survivors to feel that they
should look to the soul of the dead for the continuity
of communication with them. The sacrifices and
prayers offered to the Fravashis are primarily for
soliciting their help and favour. Those offered to the

soul of the dead on the anniversaries soon take a
vicarious form and rest on the central idea that the
performance of rites by the descendants enables the
soul of the dead to progress from a lower to a higher
place in the next world. Thus man's [243] Fravashi
and soul both are thought to claim respectively their
commemoration from the relatives of the departed
one. These two distinct forms of ancestor-worshipthe one of invoking the Fravashis of the dead for the
good of the living, and the other of sacrificing unto
the souls with the desire of contributing to their
betterment in the next world-often overlap each
other. The intermingling of the two becomes so
complete that the souls and not the Fravashis are
supposed to come down to the rituals even on the
days originally consecrated to the Fravashis.
[244]
CHAPTER XXIV
PERSONIFIED ABSTRACTIONS
The infinity of time and the immensity of space
personified. Time and Space seem to have been the
alternative answers to the early gropings of the
primitive Iranian thinkers to find some solution for
the problem of the origin of things in the universe;
and these two elements, Time and Space, are
incorporated in the Zoroastrian theology of Later
Avesta after being shorn of the power assigned to
them in the pre-Zoroastrian period. In the extant
Avestan texts they hardly have any individuality.
They are barren concepts sharing invocation along
with the celestial beings and sanctified objects. The
later works, however, speak of sects flourishing as
late as the Sasanian period and even much later, who

held these concepts as the highest categories in
religious thought and drew the names of their sects
from them.
Zrvan Akarana. This genius of Boundless Time, like
several abstract ideas which are in course of time
personified and yet are not classified among the
Yazatas, is not listed as an angel. He is often invoked
by name in company with Space and Vayu, the
genius of wind.1 He has made the path which the
righteous or the wicked soul has to traverse,2 and the
plants grow in the manner he has ordained according
to the will of Ahura Mazda and the archangels.3

1 Y72.10; Vd19.13;
Ny1.8.
2 Vd19.29.
3 Y13.56.

The Avesta distinguishes sharply between the two
different kinds of time, infinite and finite. The term
zrvan akarana, 'boundless time,' is also used in its
4 Vd19.9.
ordinary meaning of the unlimited time or eternity. It
is said that Ahura Mazda created the sacred spell
Ahuna Vairya in the Boundless Time.4
Zrvan Daregho-khvadhata. 'Time of Long Duration,'
on the other hand, is a limited period portioned out
from the Boundless Time. This finite time is also
personified and is invoked [245] by name along with
Boundless Time.5 The Younger Avestan texts do not 5 Y72.10; Ny1.8.
furnish us with any data to enable us to form any idea
of this concept, but we learn from the later scriptures
that it refers to the world's cycle of twelve thousand
years.
Thwasha. Space, or the infinite expanse, is faintly
personified under the name Thwasha Khvadhata, or 6 Y72.10; Vd19.13;
Sovereign Space. It is generally invoked along with Ny1.8.
the genius of time.6 In one place it is depicted as
7 Yt10.66.
going alongside of Mithra.7 It is referred to by
Eudemus, as quoted by Damascius, under its Greek

pronunciation Topos, who says that the Magi name
the cosmos by this name and from it are disjoined
light and darkness. Like Time, it is not ranked among
the angels.
[246]
CHAPTER XXV
BAGHAS
The divinities. One of the names for divinity in
general is Bagha, literally meaning 'dispenser.' We
have seen that its history goes far back to the IndoEuropean period. In the Rig Veda, Bhaga is one of the
Adityas, and one hymn is dedicated to him. Unlike
1 Sg. 4.8, 29; 10.69;
the term Yazata, which retains its place as a divine
appellation throughout the history of Zoroastrianism, Dk. SBE., vol. 37, bk.
Bagha soon loses its significance in the Avestan texts. 8.15.1, p. 34.
The inscriptions of the Achaemenian kings do not
2 Sg. 10.70; cf.
speak of the heavenly beings as Yazatas, but they
speak of them under the designation Bagha, as noted Mordtmann, Zur
Pehlevi-Münzkunde in
below. The Avestan texts, on the contrary, use the
term bagha hardly six times throughout the extant
ZDMG. 34.1-162.
literature, and by the time that we reach the Pahlavi
period Bagha is used to represent the idea of divinity
in general,1 and also as a title of the Sasanian
monarchs who zealously uphold the divine right of
kings.2
Ahura Mazda himself is a Bagha.3 Baga, the cognate
of the Avestan Bagha, is most freely applied to
Auramazda in the Old Persian Inscriptions. He is the
greatest of all Bagas.4 Besides ithe supreme godhead,
Mithra is expressly mentioned as a Baga.5 This does
not exhaust the list of the Baghas, for, though not
mentioned by name, the texts refer to others besides

3 Y10.10; 70.1.
4 Dar. Pers. d.1; Xer.
Elv. 1; Xer. Van. 1.
5 Yt10.141; Artaxerxes
Ochus, Pers. a (b). 4.

these two.6 In the Later Avesta, compound forms of
Bagha are also found, which also signify 'allotted by
God.'7 Bagabigna and Bagabukhsha, the names of
persons; and Bagayadi, the name of a month, [247]
are the instances of the Baga compounds that are
found in the Inscriptions.8

6 Yt10.141; Bh. 4.61,
62; Dar. Pers. d.3; Xer.
Pers. b.3; Xer. Van. 3.
7 Vsp. 7.3; Yt8.35;
Vd19.23; 21.5, 9, 13.
8 Bh. 4.18; 1.13.

Bagha plays an insignificant part as Fate personified
in the Younger Avesta, although this personification
becomes more pronounced as the personification of
Fate in the later Pahlavi period. There is, however, a
9 Vd5.8, 9. 10
solitary passage in the Vendidad, and it may be late,
Herodotus, 3.65.
which tells us that a man who is drowned in water or
burnt by fire is not killed by water or fire, but by
Fate.9 Cambyses said that it was not in the power of
man to counteract Fate.10
The term Bagha, moreover, is also frequently used in
its ordinary meaning, 'portion,' 'allotment.’

[248]
CHAPTER XXVI

Notes:

PRAYERS AND RITUALS
The nature of the Younger Avestan prayers. The
Younger Avestan propounds a ritualistic religion.1
The texts do not contain short or long continuous
compositions that may be classed as prayers which
can help man to give expression to the various
feelings, moods, desires, and aspirations that agitate

1. For rituals see Modi,
The Religious Ceremonies
and Customs of the Parsis;
Pavri. 'Ancient
Ceremonies' in Iranian
Studies, p. 194-229,

the deepest depth of his heart and the innermost
Bombay. 1927; Haug,
recesses of his mind, beget emotional exaltation and Essays on the Parsis,
devotional fervour in him, and inspire him to strive (3rd. ed.) p. 393-409.
after an ideal life. only some scattered sentences and
short passages, occurring at rare intervals, can be
collected from the mass of the liturgical texts to serve
such a purpose. Ahura Mazda, Amesha Spentas,
Yazatas, Fravashis, souls of the righteous men and
women of all times, celestial and terrestrial beings,
sun, moon, stars, sky, fire, wind, earth, water, rain,
time, space, trees, mountains, rivers, places, fields,
the season festivals, years, months, days, periods of
the day, religion, customs, spells, texts, chapters,
verses, metres, virtues, qualities, thoughts, words,
deeds, intellect, self, priests, warriors, agriculturists,
artisans, laymen, teachers, pupils, ritual implements
and various other objects are enumerated by name
with or without their attributes and functions, and
receive praise and homage. They are all alike
commemorated with the common word yazamaide,
'we worship,' in innumerable passages that pass as
insipid, laudatory prayers.
Yasna Haptanghaiti or the Yasna of Seven Chapters,
the earliest of prose compositions, made in the
Gathic dialect, in the Younger Avestan period,
contains more passages that can be termed proper
prayers than any other text in the Avestan literature.
It is significant to note that the supplicants who pray
for several boons ask them from Haoma, Ardvi Sura
and her waters, Fire, Mithra, and Sraosha rather than
from Ahura Mazda himself.
[249] We have collected references to such passages
as can be termed prayers and classified them under
the headings: Supplicatory, Confessional,

Devotional, Benedictory, Imprecatory, and
Exorcising prayers. We shall now turn to these.
Supplicatory prayers. The faithful pray unto the
Amesha Spentas and ask them to extend their
protection, as they say they do not see others than
the archangels who can take them under their
protection.2 The Yazatas are asked to grant
something greater and better and nobler than what
their supplicant asks.3 Haoma is asked to keep his
votaries far from harm,4 and give them
foreknowledge of thieves and murderers and wolves
for their safety.5 It is prayed that Sraosha and Ashi
may dwell in the house in which Haoma is the
honoured guest and that Ashi may give joy there.6
Haoma is implored to bestow upon his praisers the
healing remedies and victory over their enemies.7 He
is further asked to give bodily health and long life,8
courage and victory9 that the righteous may be the
courageous smiters of falsehood and malice.10 In the
end, the divinity of the sacrificial plant is asked to
give the shining, all happy abode of the righteous.11
Mithra is besought to give swiftness to the teams of
his worshippers, strength to their own bodies so that
they may watch successfully their enemies and smite
them,12 and also the demons and sorcerers and fairies
and those that are seeingly blind and hearingly
deaf.13 Those that have not lied unto the angel of
truth ask him to free them from distress and to give
them riches and strength, victory and happiness,
name and fame14 and joy.15 Sraosha is asked by his
invokers to grant strength to their horses and
soundness of body and strength to themselves, so
that they may be able to defeat the jealous and
inimical.16 He is asked to protect them in both the
worlds from the onslaughts of the demons of wrath

2. Y58.5.
3. Y62.14.
4. Y9.28.
5. Y9.21.
6. Y10.1.
7. Y10.9.
8. Y9.19.
9. Y9.27.
l0. Y9.20.
11. Y9.19; 11.10.
12. Yt10.94, 114.
13. Yt10.34, 59.
14. Yt10.23, 33, 58.
15. Ytl0.34, 59.
16. Y57.26.
17. Y57.25.
18. Y62.4; Ny5.10.

and death.17 The fire is asked to give abundant wellbeing, abundant sustenance, and abundant life,
together with knowledge, holiness, a ready tongue,
spiritual understanding, and comprehensive, great,
and imperishable [250] wisdom.18 Moreover, he is
asked to give manly valour, which is ever afoot,
sleeplessness, watchfulness, offspring that gives
support, ruling over the region, belonging to the
assembly, thoroughly developed, of good intellect,
that may further his house, village, town, and
country, and the renown of the country.19 Weal and
immortality are the other boons that are asked from
the fire.20 Good reward and good renown and
fulfilment of one's wishes now and forever and the
shining, all-happy abode of the righteous are asked
from the fire of Ahura Mazda.21 Ardvi Sura is invoked
to grant heroic sons of innate wisdom that may
further one's house, village, town, country, and the
religion of the country.22 The waters of Ardvi Sura
are asked to give riches and virtuous offspring that
may not wish ill of anyone;23 and they are asked to
give radiance and glory, soundness and vigour of
body, wise offspring, happiness, and life longer than
long.24 The Zaotar or the sacrificer asks the waters on
behalf of those that have participated in the sacrifice
to imbue friends and pupils, teachers and learned
men and women, youths and maidens and workmen
and all Mazdayasnians with the wisdom to follow the
path of truth.25 The shining, all happy abode of the
righteous is the last coveted boon that the waters are
asked to grant.26

19. Y62.5; Ny5.11.
20. Y58.7.
21. Y62.6; Ny5.12.
22. Y68.4, 5.
23. Y62.11.
24. Y68.11.
25. Y68.12, 13.
26. Y68.11-13.

Confessional prayers. In the Confession of Faith the 27. Y12.1, 9.
believer proclaims himself a Mazdayasnian
28. Y12.9.
Zoroastrian, an invoker of the Amesha Spentas; he
ascribes everything good in this world to Ahura

29. Vr5.3.
Mazda and he confesses that he is against the
daevas.27 He declares that the religion to which he
belongs is the greatest and the best and fairest among 30. Y11.17; 12.8.
all the existing religions.28 He puts his faith in Ahura
31. Y10.16.
Mazda.29 As a true Mazdayasnian, he bases his
conduct of life upon good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds, and renounces evil thoughts, evil words, 32. Yll.18.
and evil deeds.30 He further emphasizes that he
belongs to good thoughts and not to evil thoughts, to 33. Y12.7.
good words and not to evil words, to good deeds and
not to evil deeds, to religious obedience and not to 34. Y12.2.
heresy, to righteousness and not to wickedness, [251]
and so shall he be as long as the struggle between the 35. Y12.3.
rival spirits of good and evil lasts.31 He praises
righteousness.32 The ideal of his life will be that he
36. Y12.4.
will endeavour to be like Ahura Mazda and
Zarathushtra and Frashaoshtra and Jamaspa and all
37. Y12.5, 6.
those that have proved themselves to be the
righteous and true benefactors of mankind and even
like the good waters and trees and cattle.33 He
undertakes to protect the Mazdayasnian settlements
from harm and drought,34 and neither for the love of
his body nor his life will he ever be a source of harm
to them.35 By his thoughts, words, and deeds, does he
abjure and hate the chieftainship of the daevas,
sorcerers, and those addicted to sorcery.36 Thus will
he denounce the guidance of the daevas even as
Zarathushtra did at the command of Ahura Mazda
when they communed together.37
Devotional prayers. The devout pray that through
good mind and through rectitude and through the
deeds and words of wisdom they may go near Ahura
Mazda.38 They pay homage and acknowledge
themselves his debtors.39 As Ahura Mazda has
thought and spoken and decreed and done what is

38. Y36.4, 5; 39.4.
39. Y13.5; 36.4, 5;
39.4.
40. Y13.5.

good, so do they give unto him, praise him, and
worship him.40 They long to approach him through 41. Y13.6; 39.5.
righteousness and devotion,41 or through fire.42
Through the best and fairest righteousness they
42. Y36.1, 3.
43
yearn to see him and attain to his perfect friendship.
They worship with their bodies and their lives.44
43. Y60.12
They dedicate themselves unto him and beseech him
to be even their lives and bodies.45 They love him
44. Y37.3.
and lean upon him for strength, and ask him to make
them cheerful and happy and give them life-long joy 45. Y41.3.
in him.46 Ahura Mazda is the king of both the worlds
and the faithful aspire to attain unto his Kingdom for 46. Y41.4.
ever;47 and for all time do they seek fellowship with
him and Asha, in this world and the next.48 With the 47. Y41.2.
sacrifice and invocation and propitiation and
glorification they long to approach the Amesha
48. Y40.1.
49
Spentas, and they proffer unto them sacrifice and
prayer with [252] thoughts and words and deeds and 49. Y14.1; Vr5.1.
with all good things of life and with their beings and
with the lives of their bodies.50 The worshipper
50. Y11.18; 13.4; 14.2;
strives to make Armaiti's devotion his own.51 The
Vr5.2.
votaries of Haoma lay before him the Gathas and the
songs of praise and the savoury viands and are eager 51. Y12.2.
to dedicate their bodies to him in order to obtain
from him wisdom and happiness and purity.52 Mithra 52. Y10.18; 11.10.
is implored by those who sacrifice unto him to come
to them for help and freedom, joy and mercy, healing 53. Yt10.5; Ny2.14.
and victory, well-being and sanctification,53 The
pious dedicate their thoughts, words, and deeds, and 54. Y58.6.
their property, cattle, and men unto Spenta Mainyu;54
and unto Staota Yasna their property and bodies for 55. Y58.2, 3.
protection.55
Benedictory prayers. The priest who helps the
Zaotar or the officiating priest at the sacrifice,
invokes blessings upon him that, what is of onefold

56. Y11.9.
57. Y59.30.

help to himself, may be of twofold and threefold and
tenfold unto his senior,56 and that better than the
good may come unto him.57 The Zaotar reciprocates
that the better than the good may come to his junior
partner and worse than the bad may not overtake
him.58 The sacrificer blesses every Mazdayasnian
family with a good home and a joyful home and a
happy home.59 It is prayed that greatness may come
unto him who feeds the fire with ceremonial
offerings.60 The fire blesses the householder that a
flock of cattle and a multitude of men attend upon
him and he may have an active mind and an active
spirit be his and that he may live with a joyous life
the nights that he may live.61 The family priest
invokes joy and blessings of the righteous, good
nature, truth, prosperity, power, and glory for the
house in which he offers prayers.62 He prays that the
religion of Zarathushtra be firmly established in the
house,63 and the august Fravashis of the righteous
may come to the house with blessings of
righteousness as wide as the earth, as long as the
river, and as high as the sun for the fulfilment of the
wishes of the good and for the withstanding of the
wicked.64 His further blessings for the family are that
obedience may [253] smite disobedience in his
house, peace may dispel strife, charity may rout
niggardliness, devotion may smite heresy, and the
truth may rout falsehood,65 and he concludes by
praying that happiness may come to the house and
that the offspring and the friendship of Ashi, the
genius of fortune, may never leave it.66 The Fravashis
of the righteous shower their blessings upon the
inmates of a house in which they are propitiated that
a flock of animals and a solid chariot may be in their
houses.67

58. Y59.31.
59. Y68.14.
60. Y62.1.
61. Y62.9, 10; Ny5.15,
16.
62. Y60.2.
63. Y60.3.
64. Y60.4.
65. Y60.5.
66. Y60.7.
67. Yt13.52.

Imprecatory prayers. The pious pray that the wicked
person may be deprived of his power and driven out
from the creation of the Holy Spirit.68 Haoma is
asked to take away from the malicious that may be in
the house, village, town and country, the strength of
68. Y60.9.
their hands and feet, and their eyesight, to cover up
their intelligence, and confound their minds.69 He is
69. Y9.28, 29.
further asked to smite the robbers, tyrants, heretics,
courtezans, and slanderers.70 It is prayed that the
70. Y9.30-32; 10.12.
waters of Ardvi Sura may not be for men of evil
thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds, and evil religion,
71. Y62.6, 7.
and for the tormentors of friends, neighbours,
kinsmen, and priests, and for those who rob the good
72. Y62.8.
of their property and bring harm to them.71
Calamities and destruction are invoked upon the
thieves and robbers, murderers and oppressors of the
righteous, sorcerers and corpse-buriers, vicious and
misers, heretics and tyrants.72
Exorcising prayers. Spells are recited to deliver men
and women and children from the supposed influence
of the malignant spirits. The formuia recites the
names of diseases of the demons and condemns them 73. Yt3.7.
to flee to the north or perish. In the name of
74. Yt3.8.
Airyaman, the priest says avaunt to sickness and
73
death, demons and foes, heretics and oppressors,
the two-legged brood of snakes and wolves, arrogant 75. Yt3.9.
and proud, slanderous and inimical, and evil-eyed,74
worst liars and witches, courtezans and the wind from 76. Vd8.21, 72; 9.27;
the north.75 The priest recites the spell to purify the cf. Vd10.13, 14; 11.9,
10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18,
way over which a dead body is carried or to give
cleanliness to a man who has touched a corpse or to 19; 20.7, 9; 21.18, 19;
one who seeks purification by ceremonial ablutions, 22.21.
and commands the demoness of defilement [254] and
her evil brood to flee and perish in the region of the
north and never more appear to defile the creation of

righteousness.76
Priestly functionaries who conducted the sacrificial
ceremonies. The priestly hierarchy that was firmly
established during this period was headed by the
high priest, who was called Zarathushtrotema. He is
invoked by this name.77 The Rig Veda speaks of
about sixteen priests that performed ceremonies and
we have in the Avestan texts eight different
functionaries who were employed in the performance
of the Yasna ceremoNy These are zaotar, 'sacrificer,'
hâvanân, 'the pounder of Haoma,' âtravakhsh, 'tender
of the fire,' fraberetar, 'carrier of things,' âberetar,
'bringer of things,' âsnâtar, 'cleanser,' raethwishkara,
'auxiliary priest,' and sraoshâvarez, 'master of rituals.'78

77. Y2.6; 3.8; 4.11;
6.5; 7.8.
78. Vr3.1; Yt24.15;
Vd5.57, 58; 7.17, 18;
G3.5.

Revival of the Indo-Iranian rituals. With the return 79. Y42.5.
of the Indo-Iranian divinities come also the
ceremonies that their early votaries had celebrated
80. Y39.2.
before their separation. The Yasna Haptanghaiti
already refers to the Haoma ceremony,79 the
81. Y37.3.
80
invocation of the souls of the dead, and their
Fravashis.81 The chief ceremony is the Yasna
82. See Hodivala,
corresponding to the Vedic Yajnya, the more
Indo-Iranian Religion in
important part among both being the preparation of The Journal of the K.
the Haoma-Soma juice. The Haoma ceremony is
R. Cama Oriental
shorn of its early gross element, yet the resemblance Institute, 4. 7-10,
between it and the Soma cult is so great that they are Bombay, 1924.
spoken of in identical words. We shall quote a few of
the more important passages to show the close
83. I. 132.
parallelism between the Haoma-Soma cult. The
celestial plant, it is said, was brought upon earth by 84. P. 733.
birds. It is girishta or girijâta and parvatâ vrddhah, say the
Vedic texts, and the Avesta says it is bareshnush paiti
85. See article on
gairinâm and paurvatâhva vîraodha, that is, growing on Barsom by Mills and
mountains. It is Av. zairi, and Skt. hari, meaning green Gray in ERE. 2. 424,

or golden. It is passed through a sieve of the hairs of 425.
the tail of the sacred bull among the Iranians and
from that made of sheep wool among the Indians.
86. See Hodivala, ib.,
The extracting process is called Av. havana and Skt. 12-20.
savana. It is Av. haomahe madho, and Skt. somyam madhu,
'sweet juice of Haoma-Soma.' [255] is Av. baeshaza,
and Skt. bheshaja, 'healing.' The plant is deified
among both and then it is called Av. hvaresh, and Skt.
svarshâ 'celestial,' it is Av. hukhratu, and Skt. sukratu,
'possessed of good intelligence.' It is Av. verethrajâ,
and Skt. vrtrahâ 'victorious'.82 Herodotus says that the
Magi placed the consecrated flesh upon the tenderest
grass,83 and Strabo refers to the bundle of rods held
by the Magi when he stood praying before the fire.84
These are the baresman twigs employed in varying
numbers in different ceremonies by the Zoroastrian
priests. They correspond to the Vedic barhis, the
carpet of straw upon which the heavenly lords sat
when they attended the sacrifices.85 Some of the
minor ceremonies among both peoples resemble one
another and same corresponding terms are employed
for many ceremonial utensils, implements, and
articles of offerings.86
Animal sacrifices. Meat was a principal article of diet
among the Iranians and it was, likewise, used in
sacred feasts and festivals, or in funeral repasts. We
learn from the Denkard that the Pazag Nask dealt with
the way in which an animal was to be slaughtered
according to the religious rites.87 The Nirangisan, has
several pages devoted to the kind, quality, and size of
the animal that was fit for a sacrificial offering about
the way in which it was to be slaughtered, the sacred
formulas to be recited while immolating the victim,
about the manner in which different parts of the
slaughtered animal were to be consecrated and

87. Dk., vol. 15, bk.
8.6. 1, 2, p. 12, 13.
88. Nr., bk. 2.13.44;
20.15.16.
89. Athenaeus, 4, p.
145.
90. Yt10.119.
91. Herod. 7.43, 53,

dedicated to the various heavenly beings, and the
54.
way in which the consecrated viands were to be
eaten at the close of the sacrifice. Like the flesh of an 92. Ib., 7.113; cf.
animal, fish was also used for sacrificial repasts.88 The Ovid, Fasti, 1. 385.
animals generally used in sacrifice were horses,
camels, oxen, asses, stags, sheep, and birds.89 We
93. Cyropaedia, 8. 24.
have already seen that kings and heroes sacrificed
male horses, oxen, and small cattle to Ardvi Sura and 94. P. 732; cf. Herod.
Drvaspa. Small and large cattle, and winged birds are 1. 132; see Edwards,
sacrificed unto Mithra. [256] Verethraghna, we have Sacrifice (Iranian) in
noticed, received cooked repasts of cattle and Haoma ERE. 11.18-21.
received his share of the sacrificed animal. Xerxes
sacrificed a thousand oxen at Hellespont to the
Athene of Ilium, while the Magi offered libations to
the sun, and to the Manes of the heroes.91 When the
great king came to the river Strymon, the Magi
offered a sacrifice of white horses.92 We have already
seen that other classical writers speak of the horses
sacrificed to the sun by the Persian kings. The most
important form of the sacrifice among the Vedic
Indians was, likewise, the ashvamedha in which horses
were sacrificed. Cyrus, says Xenophon, sacrificed
bulls to God, horses to the sun, and other animals to
the earth.93 Strabo tells us that the animal was
garlanded and sacrificed at a clean place after reciting
the dedicatory prayer. The victim was then divided
limb from limb by the presiding priest and portions
were distributed among the sacrificers. The divinity,
it was believed, required the spirit of the victim. A
little piece of caul was, however, put upon the fire.94
[257]
CHAPTER XXVII
EVIL

Dualism in evolution. The original Gathic
conception of the reality of evil is more emphasized
by the theologians of the Later Avestan period, and
the personality of the Prince of Evil becomes at the
same time more pronounced. The hardest crux that
confronts the Zoroastrian divines, as it does every
theologian, is how Ahura Mazda, the father of
goodness, can be made responsible for the existence
of evil in this world. The prophet has already taught
the existence of an independent power as the
1. Herod. 1. 140;
originator of evil. The idea inherent in this teaching
Plutarch, Is. et Os. 46.
is now elaborately worked out until every object that
is branded by man as evil is ascribed to the agency of
2. Y9.8; Yt17.34.
the Evil Spirit. A ban is put upon everything in the
universe that is opposed to Asha's realm of
3. Vd22.2, 9, 15.
righteousness, even to the detail of noxious creatures
and poisonous plants. They belong to the evil
4. See Frachtenberg,
creation. Herodotus and Plutarch inform us that the
Etymological Studies in
Magi held it a virtue to kill noxious creatures.1 From
Ormazdian and
the standpoint of evil, therefore, it is easy to
Ahrimanian words in the
understand that such a usurper king as Azhi Dahaka,
Avesta in Spiegel
who took a fiendish delight in feasting his eyes upon
Memorial Volume, p.
the most atrocious crimes perpetrated under his rule,
269-289; Moulton,
was sent to this world by the arch-fiend as the apostle
Early Zoroastrianism, p.
of destruction and death.2 Hail and hurricane,
218, 219.
cyclone and thunderstorm, plague and pestilence,
famine and drought, in fact everything that harms
man and decimates population, belong to the realm
of evil. Angra Mainyu has cast an evil eye upon the
good creation of Ahura Mazda, and by his glance of
malice introduced corruption and disease into the
universe.3 The opposition between the Good and Evil
Spirits is so pronounced that distinctive linguistic
expressions are now used for both. There are separate
words used for the organs, movements, and speech of

the Good Spirit and his creation, and for those of the
Evil Spirit and his world; [258] and this rule applies
to wicked men in general as well as to the noxious
creatures. The man of the kingdom of goodness
'speaks,' but the wicked one 'howls' or 'roars'; the
former 'eats,' but the latter 'devours'; the good one
'walks,' but the wicked 'rushes'; the one has a 'head,'
but the other has a 'skull'; the one dwells in a 'house,'
the other in a 'burrow.'4 Thus the antithesis between
good and evil becomes even more and more
prominent. It is indelible. Evil remains as real a factor
as good, as independent, and as active. There is a
pronounced antithesis and an active warfare between
the two rival spirits, and reconciliation or peace
between them is impossible. Every prayer in the
Younger Avesta begins with the exhortation to
propitiate the Good Spirit and abjure the Evil One.
Man is warned to guard himself from the wiles of
Angra Mainyu.
The earliest non-Zoroastrian writers speak of
Zoroastrianism as the religion of dualism. Early
Greek writers, who, we can safely assert, were
contemporary at least with the Later Avestan period,
speak of the religion of lran as based on the belief in
two rival spirits. Hippolytus relates, on the authority
of Aristoxenus (about 320 B.C.), that the Persians
believed in two primeval causes of existence, the first
being Light, or the father, and the second, Darkness,
the mother.5 On the authority of Diogenes Laertius
we have the assurance that Eudoxus and Aristotle
wrote of these two powers as Zeus, or Oromazdes,
and Hades, or Areimanios.6 Plutarch (A.D. 46-120)
narrates, in the same tone, that Oromazdes came
from light, and Areimanios from darkness. The Good
Spirit created six archangels and other divine beings,

5. Refutatio Haeresium,
1.2.
6. Prooem 8.
7. Is. et Os. 46, 47.
8. Is. et Os. 47.
9. Prooem. 9.

and the Evil One created as a counterpoise to them
six arch-fiends, and other infernal creatures, and the
devil's activity of counter-creation extended also to
the physical world, for in opposition to the creation
of good animals and plants by Oromazdes, he
brought forth noxious creatures and poisonous plants.
His opposition permeates the entire creation and will
last up to the end of time, when he will be defeated
and be made to disappear.7 Plutarch himself further
mentions, [259] on the authority of Theopompus
(400 B.C.), the loss of whose excursus dealing with
Zoroastrianism in antiquity is still to be deplored,
that the good God ruled for three thousand years,
and the Evil One for another three thousand years.
At the expiration of six thousand years, they entered
into a conflict which goes on, and which will end in
the final annihilation of the fiend.8 Diogenes
confirms this statement.9 All this has its historic
bearing upon the whole realm of Zoroastrianism in
its relation to the great religions of the world, for
each and all of them have had to deal with the
problem of evil in its application to the life of man.
ANGRA MAINYU
The titles of the Evil Spirit. The Gathic epithet angra 10. Vd19.1, 43.
is turned into a proper name. Angra Mainyu is the
Demon of Demons,10 who has crept into the creation 11. Yt13.77.
of the Good Spirit.11 His standing epithet is 'full of
death.'12 He is all death.13 He is deadly.14 He is of evil 12. Y61.2; Yt3.13;
glory.15 He is the worst liar.16 He is a tyrant,17 of evil 10.97; 13.71; 15.56;
creation,18 of evil religion,19 and of evil knowledge,20 17.19; 18.2; 24.43;
and of malignity,21 as well as inveterately wicked.22 Vd1.3; 19.1, 43, 44;
He is the doer of evil deeds.23 The north is the seat of 22.2; Aog. 4.28.
Angra Mainyu,24 where he lives with his evil brood in
13. Yt13.71.
the bowels of the earth to make onslaughts on the

world of righteousness.25
14. Yt22.2.
15. Yt24.43.
16. Yt3.13.
17. Vd19.3.
18. Y61.2; Vd19.6.
19. WFr. 4.2.
20. Aog. 4.
21. Yt17.19; Vd11.10;
19.1, 5, 9, 12, 44.
22. Y27.1; Yt10.118;
13.71, 78.
23. Yt19.97.
24. Vd19.1.
25. Yt19.44.
26. Y57.17; Yt11.12;
The counter-creations of Angra Mainyu. The
13.76; 15.3, 43, 44;
Avestan texts persistently speak of the creations of
the two spirits, Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu;26 Vd3.20; 13, 1, 2, 5, 6,
moreover the first chapter of the Vendidad contains a 16.
list of the good places created by Ahura Mazda, over
against which the Evil One counter-created various 27. Vd20.3; 22.2.
physical and moral evils to thwart the peace and
28. Vd2.29, 37.
happiness of the good creation. It is the Evil Spirit
who has infected [260] the bodies of mortals with

disease and decay;27 it is from him that come
deformities of body;28 and he is ever perpetrating
wrong against the world of goodness. Angra Mainyu
corrupts the moral nature of man. He it was who
called into existence the tyrant Azhi Dahaka for the
destruction of the creatures of righteousness.29 The
rival spirits have divided their sphere of possession
and activity of the wind of Vayu, a part of which
belongs to the Good Spirit, whereas the other part is
included in the kingdom of the Evil Spirit.30

29. Y9.8.
30. Y22.24; 25.5;
Yt15.5, 42, 57; Sr1.21;
2.21.

Angra Mainyu grovels before Zarathushtra. In his
malicious thoughts and teachings, his intellect and
faith, his words and deeds, and in conscience and
soul, the Evil Spirit is exactly and diametrically the
opposite of Ahura Mazda.31 Angra Mainyu practises
deceitful wiles, and incites man to rebel against the
divine authority. As the arch-betrayer he allures man
31. Y19.15.
to abjure the Good Spirit. On the advent of
Zarathushtra, as the true prophet, this soul of
32. Yt17.19.
righteousness stupefies him, because he sees in the
earthly embodiment of Ahura Mazda's will his eternal
33. Vd19.6, 7.
foe, who will by holy teaching and preaching
threaten the overthrow of his infernal empire of
34. Vd19.46, 47.
wickedness.32 The Prince of Darkness, in tempting
Zarathushtra, promises him the sovereignty of the
world, if he will only reject the faith of Mazda; but 35. Yt17.19, 20.
the prophet replies that he will not renounce the
36. Y19.15.
excellent religion, either for body or life.33 Angra
Mainyu determines to overthrow such faith on the
part of the prophet to whom he is so opposed, and
resolves to wreak vengeance upon him. He clamours
for the death of the sage, and lets loose legions of
demons to assail him, but the chosen of Ahura Mazda
is found to be an impregnable rock, not to be moved.
The blessed one scatters his assailants in flight. They

rush howling and weeping to the regions of darkness,
or hell.34 Defeated and dismayed, the Evil Spirit
bewails that Zarathushtra alone has accomplished
what all the Yazatas together were unable to do; in
other words, he is the only one who has baffled the
devil and his infernal [261] crew.35 At the beginning
of creation the recital of Ahuna Vairya [ahunwar] by
Mazda put Angra Mainyu to flight,36 and as a
consequence the Spirit of Evil crouches in abject
servility to Mazda's prophet, who has hurled him
backward into the darkest abyss.
The demon-binder Takhma Urupi turned Angra
37. Yt15.12; 19.29.
Mainyu into a horse and rode him all around the
earth during his reign of thirty years.37 The Fravashis
38. Yt13.12, 13, 71.
force him to give way to the blows of Spenta
Mainyu.38 He bewails that Asha Vahishta frustrates
39. Yt3.14-17.
his efforts to spread sickness.39
Angra Mainyu's final defeat. Since the time when
the Evil Spirit broke into the world of
Righteousness,40 a constant war is being waged
against the hosts of Wickedness by the powers of
Righteousness, as shall be to the last when
Righteousness shall triumph over Wickedness. The
faithful, accordingly, pray that Wickedness may be
routed and Righteousness may rule for all in all. Every 40. Yt13.77.
child of man has had his share in this universal strife
and struggle. Those that through ignorance have not 41. Yt19.96.
been steadfast in the path of goodness, and have been
led to revolt from their creator, are those that have
been victims to the clutch of Angra Mainyu. As the
world progresses towards the true knowledge of the
excellent Faith, mankind will embrace Righteousness
and thus weaken the power of Wickedness. The
perfection of mankind will thus come to pass; and

finally the Father of Evil and all imperfection, having
been deserted by his misguided followers, will be
impotent. This will be the final crisis at which the
Sovereign of Evil, bereft of power, will bow to his
final fate and flee,41 and will hide himself forever in
the bowels of the earth.
DAEVAS
The Demons. The daevas, or demons, are of both
sexes, as are their heavenly counterparts. Over
against the vispe Yazata, or 'all angels,' stand in sharp
contradistinction the vispe Daeva, 'all demons.'42 The
greatest of all the demons is Angra Mainyu,43 who
has created these fiends in opposition to the [262]
Yazatas. The archangelic host of the Amesha
Spentas, and some of the angel band of Yazatas have
each a Daeva as a special adversary engaged in
thwarting the divine will. Plutarch states that when
Oromazdes created the six archangels, Areimanios
counter-created an equal number of fiends.44 The
arrangement, however, is perfunctory, if we examine
the Younger Avestan text. The personality of the
majority of these demons is not sharply defined, and
the account of their activities, as found in the Later
Avestan texts, is very vague and meagre. Some are
mentioned simply by name, without any account of
their function being added; it is only through the
help of the Pahlavi literature that we can get a more
definite idea of their place in the infernal group. Not
only are the wicked spirits spoken of as the Daevas,
but also the nomadic hordes of Gilan and
Mazanderan, realms designated as Mazainya in the
Avesta, that constantly burst with their infidel hordes
of invaders into the settlements of the faithful,
menacing their properties, devastating their fields,

42. Y27.1; 57.18;
Yt9.4; 19.81; Vd10.16.
43. Vd19.1, 43.
44. Is. et Os. 47.
45. Y27.1; 57.17;
Yt5.22; 9.4; 10.97;
13.137; Vd10.14, 16;
17.9, 10.
46. Vd8.31, 32.
47. Vd8.80.
48. Yt6.3; Ny1.13.
49. Vd7.55-58.
50. Vd17.2, 3.
51. Vd7.2; 19.1.
52. Y12.4.

and carrying away their flocks, are branded as
Daevas.45 The wicked sodomite is equally a daeva,
and a worshipper of daevas, as well as a paramour of
daevas; he is a daeva during life, and remains a daeva
after death.46 All moral wrongs and physical obstacles
are personified and catalogued in this scheme of
demonology. To every disease is assigned its own
demon as having been the cause of the malady. The
germs of disease and death, of plague and pestilence,
are spoken of metaphorically as Daevas. The Fire of
Ahura Mazda serves to kill such Daevas by thousands
wherever the scent of the holy flame may spread.47 It
is said that if the sun were not to rise, and the light of
day should not curb their power to do harm under
the cover of darkness, the Daevas would kill all living
beings.48 In connection with such ideas of the power
of evil, it may be understood that the Avestan texts
teach that the ground wherein are interred the
corpses of the dead is infested with myriads of the
demons, who feed and revel on the spot as a
consequence, for such a place is their favourite
haunt.49 Even the dropping of nails and hair on the
ground is an act of [263] uncleanness that is
equivalent to offering a sacrifice to the demons, as
spirits of pollution. Such a careless act of uncleanness
results in the production of demoniacal foes to health
and purity such as lice and moths, which are equally
called the daevas.50 The northern regions are peopled
with the demons.51 They are evil, bereft of good, illbehaved, evil-doing, worst liars, most loathsome, and
most wicked.52
The number of the demons is said to be legion, even
though the Avestan texts mention only about fortyfive more explicitly by name. As in other cases of the
fiendish crew of hell, many of these evil powers have

no story in particular to tell, but we shall deal with
the more important ones in the sections that
immediately follow.
The work of the demons. The demons have all been
allotted their special provinces of work in both the
worlds. Active work and strenuous exertion on the
53. Vd3.32.
part of man deal them blows; for example, when the
farmer tills his fields and sows his corn, the demons
54. Yt10.50.
are dismayed. When the corn grows the demons start
in dismay and faint, they grumble and rush to their
55. Vd18.54, 55.
hovels.53 They spread uncleanness on the earth,54 that
the creatures may thereby suffer, and attack and
56. Vd19.3.
overpower him who moves about without the sacred
girdle.55 They sought for the death of Zarathushtra.56
57. Yt13.57.
They prevented the stars, the moon, and the sun
from moving, until the Fravashis showed them their
path.57
Means to confound them. The faithful recite the
holy spells to dispel the demons. Zarathushtra
himself, at the outset, baffled them by uttering the
holy word.58 As stated elsewhere, these evil spirits are
put to flight at the recital of the Ahuna Vairya,
Ashem Vohu, Gathic stanzas, and the other spells,59
and the drinking of the consecrated Haoma,
moreover, brings destruction to them.60
Those who strike terror into the hearts of the
demons. Ahura Mazda is invoked to smite the
demons,61 and Haurvatat, Ardvi Sura, Drvaspa, and
the Fravashis are invoked by the [264] kings and
heroes to the same end.62 Asha Vahishta smites the
worst of the demons by thousands,63 while they
tremble before Sraosha, who wields a club in his
hands to strike upon their skulls.64 Three times each

58. Yt13.90.
59. Yt3.7, 10; 4.2;
11.6; Vd10.13-16;
18.16.
60. Y10.6.
61. Y27.1.
62. Yt4.2; 5.22, 26,
68, 77; 9.4; 13.45,
137.
63. Yt2.11, 12; 3.10,
14.

day and each night Sraosha comes down upon this
earth with his terrible mace to fight against the
64. Vd19.15.
65
demons. Mithra likewise levels his club at their
skulls and smites them down.66 The kings
65. Y57.31, 32.
Haoshyangha, Takhma Urupi, and Vishtaspa
triumphed and ruled over the demons.67 Of course
66. Yt6.5; 10.26, 97,
the demons are terrified at the birth of
128-133.
68
69
Zarathushtra. They conspired to kill him, but he
routed them at the outset.70 Not one of them, nor all 67. Yt19.26, 28, 29,
together, could compass the hallowed sage's death;71 84
they vanished overcome at his sight.72 In fact all
those demons that roamed about on the earth in
68. Vd19.46.
human form sank beneath the earth at the appearance
of the prophet.73 For all these reasons it may be
69. Vd19.3.
understood that in the realm of the hereafter the
demons quail at the sight of a righteous soul
70. Yt13.89.
advancing towards heaven, in the same manner as a
sheep trembles in the presence of a wolf.74
71. Yt8.44.
72. Yt19.80.
73. Y9.15; FrW. 4.3.
74. Vd19.33; Aog. 19.
The Daeva-worshippers. In opposition to the faithful
who are called Mazdayasnians, or the worshippers of
Mazda, all unbelievers and wicked persons are styled
the Daevayasnians, that is, as being worshippers of
the demons. The two worlds of the righteous and the
wicked are rent asunder. The barrier between them
cannot be broken. Mazda extends his helping hand
to the righteous, but leaves the wicked to themselves.
Nay he hates them.
As the dregvant, or the wicked one, stands in

75. Vd7.36-40.

antithesis to the ashavan, the righteous one, in the
sphere of morals, so the Daevayasnian, or worshipper 76. Yt5.94, 95; Nr.68.
of demons, stands in contradistinction to the faithful
Mazdayasnian in the matter of belief. Both words,
dregvant and daevayasna, are Zoroastrian synonyms
also of heretic. The life of a Daevayasnian is not of
equal value with that of a Mazdayasnian; this is
shown in the Avesta by the fact that the new surgeon
who intends practising among the Mazdaworshippers must first prove his skill on three of the
[265] Daeva-worshippers; and if his operations are
successful he may then be given permission to
practise among the faithful, but if his tests prove fatal
he is to be disqualified forever.75 In regard to acts of
worship, moreover, those misguided sacrificers who
bring libations unto Ardvi Sura after sunset are
classed among the worshippers of the Daevas, for the
libations brought after the sun has set reach the
demons.76
Zoroastrianism is anti-daeva, or against the
demons. In the hymn of the Confession of Faith that
the faithful recites from the time when he as a child is
invested with the sacred cord [kusti], and which he
thereafter repeats throughout his life at the opening
of each daily prayer, he proclaims himself a
worshipper of Mazda and a foe to the demons.77 In 77. Y12.1.
this antagonistic attitude to all that is evil, he abjures
everything relating to the demons and all that may 78. Y12.4-6.
accrue from them, exactly as the prophet
Zarathushtra did.78 One of the Nasks, or books of the
Avesta, moreover, derives its name from this very
expression and is called, accordingly, the Vendidad,
more correctly 'Vidaeva-dâta,' or 'law against the
demons.'

AKA MANAH
The demon of Evil Mind. Angra Mainyu has created
Aka Manah, or Evil Mind, as a counterpoise to the
Good Mind of Vohu Manah. The fiend occupies,
after his father, Angra Mainyu, the second place
among the whole host of demons. In spite of this, he
figures very rarely in the Younger Avesta and we do
not hear so much of his activity as in the Pahlavi
works. Aka Manah, in the scene of the temptation of
the prophet, joins in the stratagem of the demon Buiti 79. Vd19.4.
to assail Zarathushtra, and as an impersonation of the
baser side of the human mind he practises his wiles 80. Yt19.46.
by guileful words of seduction for the sainted leader
to abandon the course of righteousness, but the holy 81. Yt19.96.
prophet baffles the fiend in his attempt.79 This evil
being, moreover, takes part unsuccessfully in the
contest between the powers of the Good Spirit and
the Evil Spirit to seize the Divine Glory.80 The ethics
of Zoroastrianism naturally demands that Aka
Manah's power shall be ultimately destroyed, and
accordingly he [266] will be vanquished by Vohu
Manah at the end of the present cycle.81
DRUJ
The embodiment of wickedness. In his inscriptions,
Darius concentrates all evil in Drauga or Lie, as the
Gathas did in Druj. Druj is feminine in gender and,
like other demons, is a spirit.82 This evil genius of
Wickedness of the Gathic period preserves her
original traits in the Yasna and Yasht literature, but it
seems, if we judge rightly, that she gradually
undergoes a transformation in the Vendidad. The
Gathic prayer of the faithful to enable the true
believer to smite Druj, and thereby to weaken the

82. Yt1.19; 11.3;
13.71.
83. Y61.5; Yt1.28.
84. Y60.5; Yt24.25;
Vd20.8.
85. Yt19.93.

Kingdom of Wickedness, is still echoed in the first
86. Yt13.12, 13.
part of the Avestan period.83 The house-lord, for
example, invokes Asha to drive away Druj from his 87. Yt10.86.
house, and the faithful asks for strength to enable him
to smite Druj, while he likewise implores the good
88. Yt19.95.
84
Vayu to remove the fiendish Druj. King Vishtaspa,
as a champion warring against all that is evil, drove 89. Y9.8; 57.15;
away Druj from the world of Righteousness;85 and
Yt5.34; Vd8.21; 18.31
even Ahura Mazda himself acknowledges that had
f.
not the Fravashis helped him, Druj would have
overpowered the entire world.86 In the same manner 90. Yt3.17; Vd8.21.
we can conceive why Mithra should be invoked by
cattle that have been led astray to the den of Druj by
the wicked.87 Druj is designated as of evil descent and
darkness,88 and devilish by nature.89 Her abode is in
the north.90
In her burrows gathered the demons.91 It is through
the help of the religion of Mazda that the Druj can
be driven away from the world; this is expressly the
saying of Ahura Mazda to his prophet.92 At the final
renovation Saoshyant, the saviour, will overcome the
Druj among mankind;93 she will then perish utterly
and forever with her hundred-fold brood.94

91. Vd3.7.

Other Drujes. The Gathas knew but one Druj, the
one that works in opposItion to Asha. In the Later
Avestan texts Druj [267] becomes a class designation
of minor female demons. These fiends are styled the
Drujes, and Yt2.11 speaks of vispe druj, 'all drujes,' in
the same strain as vispe Yazata, 'all Yazatas,' and vispe
daeva, 'all demons.' From the sacred texts we learn
that there are drujes who come openly, and there are
those that come in secret, and again there are those
that defile by mere contact.95-96 The term druj itself is
loosely applied likewise to other demons and wicked

95-96. Yt4.6.

92. Vd19.12, 13.
93. Yt13.129.
94. Yt19.12, 95.

97. Vd19.12.
98. Vd19.1-3.
99. Vd19.46.
100. Y57.15; Yt3.17;
11.3.

persons. Angra Mainyu himself is called a druj.97 The 101. Yt11.3.
demon Buiti, for instance, is designated as a druj,98
and the demoniacal Azhi Dahaka, who was sent to
102. Vd18.30-59.
this world by the arch-fiend as a scourge to the world
of Righteousness, is called a druj. The daevas,
moreover, when baffled in their foul attempt to kill
Zarathushtra, howl out that he is a veritable druj to
every druj.99 The conviction of the pious that Druj
will perish at the hands of Asha Vahishta is for all
time firm, because Sraosha appears on the field as the
best smiter of Druj.100 Manthra Spenta routs the
Druj.101 In a lengthy disputation, moreover, Sraosha
extorts from the fiendish impersonation, Druj, the
secret of how mankind by their various misdeeds
impregnate her and her brood of fiends; that is, in
simpler language, he learns from her by what
particular works man increases the Druj's domain of
wickedness.102
Druj as the personification of bodily impurity under
the name Nasu. Purity of body, mind, and spirit go
together to constitute a righteous man. The Gathas 103. Vd3.7.
pre-eminently speak of the ethical virtues and purity
of soul. Asha presides over Righteousness, and Druj 104. Vd7.1, 2.
acts as the evil genius of Wickedness. The greater
portion of the Vendidad, however, contains priestly 105. Vd7.3.
legislation for purity of body, as well as of the soul,
106. Yt4.5; Vd10.1.
and gives elaborate rules for the cleansing of those
defiled by dead matter. The uncleanness embodied in
the very term druj is now personified as Druj Nasu; 107. Vd9.12-26.
her abode is in the burrow at the neck of the
mountain Arezura in the northern region, but at the 108. Vd7.78, 79.
same time her presence is everywhere manifest on
109. Vd19.12, 13.
this earth.103 Her chief function is to spread
defilement and decay in the world. Immediately after
the death of an individual, when the soul leaves the

body and decomposition sets in, the Druj Nasu
comes [268] flying from the north in the shape of a
despicable fly, and takes possession of the corpse.104
She is expelled, however, when a dog or the corpseeating birds have gazed at the dead body,105 and
when certain pious formulas have been recited. In
reply to the inquiry how one may best drive away the
Druj Nasu that rushes from the dead and defiles the
living, Ahura Mazda bids the faithful to recite the
holy spells.106 When the purifactory rites have been
performed and the sacred formulas uttered upon the
one defiled by the dead, the Druj Nasu becomes
weaker weaker and weaker and flees from one part of
the body to the other, until finally she vanishes
towards the northern regions.107 Whoso offers for
consecration water that has in any way been defiled
by the dead, or proffers libations after the sun has set,
even though with good intent, feeds the Druj and
thereby hinders the work of righteousness.108 The
religion of Mazda, as a faith paramount, dispels best
this Druj of defilement.109
The barrier between the ashavans and dregvants is
still impassable. Though the concept Druj as the
genius of wickedness has undergone a change in the
Later Avesta, the adjectival form, dregvant, meaning
wicked, as opposed to ashavan, righteous, remains
unaltered. This designation is applied equally to bad
men and to demons, in the same manner as it used to
be in the Gathas. Angra Mainyu himself is
dregvant.110 The term is applied to Dahaka,111
Arejataspa,111a to all Daevayasnians, and to all of evil
thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds. The world of
righteousness is opposed by the world of
wickedness.112 The faithful pray that the righteous
may have the power to act according to their will,

110. Y27.1; 61.5.
111. Y9.8.
111a. Yt5.109.
112. Y8.8; Vd18.76.
113. Y8.5, 6.
114. Y10.16.
115. Yt1.28.

but that the wicked may be bereft of it and be driven 116. Vd9.51, 52.
out from the world of the Holy Spirit.113 Every true
believer confesses that he belongs to the righteous
117. Vd18.11.
and not to the wicked.114 That the righteous may rout
the wicked is the fervent praytt of the faithful.115
118. Vd18.12.
Along with the employment of this term, the
application of the derogatory title ashemaogha, literally 119. Yt13.105.
meaning 'one who destroys Asha, Righteousness,' has
120. Yt1.10, 11.
come into vogue and is equally applied to the
wicked. Perhaps [269] there is this difference in
121. Yt15.51.
usage; that dregvant is an ethical appellation of
unrighteous men, whereas ashemaogha seems to be a
theological and ritual designation of one who
deviates from the prescribed teachings of the
established church and who preaches heresy both as
regards the doctrines of the faith and the rules of
ceremonial. The ashemaogha is generally to be
understood as equivalent to the unrighteous. Anyone
who undertakes to cleanse a person defiled by the
dead, without being well-versed in the Zoroastrian
rules of cleanness, is also an ashemaogha. Such a man
retards the progress of the world by his false deed.116
If a priest of this character were to give a
benediction, his words of blessing would go no
further than his lips.117 Whoso gives the consecrated
food to a sinner of that type brings calamity to his
own country.118 He himself is a heretic, for he does
not acknowledge any temporal or spiritual master.119
Ahura Mazda accordingly advises Zarathushtra to
recite the divine names when he wishes to rout the
malice of any such apostate;120 Vayu likwise enjoins
upon him to utter his sacred names when in danger of
being so harassed.121
INDRA

A god in the Vedas, a demon in the Avesta. This
demon furnishes us with an instance of degrading one
of the great Indian divinities to the rank of a demon
in the Iranian theology. He is mentioned in the
Boghaz-keui tablets, recently discovered in Asia
Minor, that are supposed to date from about 1400
122. Vd19.43.
B.C. His name occurs but twice in the extant Avestan
text: he is mentioned as one of the ribald crew routed
123. Vd10.9.
by Zarathushtra;122 and in another passage a spell
mentioning him by name is recited to drive away the
demons.123 These two Avestan passages, however, do
not give us an inkling of the function of this fiend. In
the Pahlavi period he assumes the part of Asha
Vahishta's adversary.
SAURVA
Foe to the archangel Khshathra Vairya. The Indian
counterpart of the demon Sauvra is Sharva. The
Avestan texts, [270] which make two mentions of the
name of this demon, do not give us his life-story.124 In 124. Vd10.9; 19.43.
the diabolical host he is the adversary of the
archangel Khshathra Vairya, through whom shall be
lished the Kingdom of Ahura Mazda.
TAROMAITI
She thwarts devotion. This feminine demoniacal
impersonation of heresy and counterpart of Spenta
Armaiti is to be smitten by the recital of the sacred 125. Yt3.8, 11, 15.
formulas; she will flee away as soon as the Airyaman
126. Y60.5.
Ishya prayer is uttered.125 The faithful, in
consequence, pray that the genius of devotion may
dispel this demoness from their houses.126
NAONGHAITHYA

A demon of incipient personality. Naonghaithya
corresponds to the Vedic Nasatya, the epithet of the
heavenly Ashvins, and is likewise mentioned in the
Boghas-keui tablets, but is classed in the Zoroastrian
works among the evil powers. The demon is twice
mentioned in the Avestan texts,127 but the passages in 127. Vd10.9; 19.43.
question shed no real light on the sphere of his
activity. During the Pahlavi period, however (and the
same may reasonably be presumed for the Avesta),
Naonghaithya, or Naunghas, as he is then called, is
seen working in antagonism to Spenta Armaiti.
TAURVI AND ZAIRICHA
The adversaries of Haurvatat and Ameretat. The
names of the dual demons Taurvi and Zairicha
personify, in later texts at least, fever and thirst. They
occur together and are mentioned in two places in
128. Vd10.9; 19.43.
the Younger Avesta,128 yet without any special
description of their work. They are in the Pahlavi
texts depicted as the adversaries of the dual divinities
Haurvatat and Ameretat, whose active mission in the
world has been described above.
[271]
ASTOVIDHOTU
The fiend of death. As indicated etymologically by
the root of the Avestan words maretan and mashya,
man is mortal. This mortality applies to his material
frame only. At death he dies in the flesh, but he lives
forever in the spirit. Astovidhotu, literally 'the bonedivider,' who impersonates death, awaits all. When a
man is burnt by fire or drowned in water, it is
Astovidhotu who binds his breath and hastens him to

129. Vd5.8, 9.
130. Aog. 57.
131. Aog. 70-73.
132. Y57.25; Yt10.93.

an unnatural death.129 Man trembles at Astovidhotu's 133. Yt13.11, 28.
sight.130 The demon prowls with padded feet and
silently creeps to capture his victim, pouncing upon 134. Vd4.47-49.
him so suddenly that the unfortunate one remains
unaware of his doom. He cannot be won over by
favour or by bribe. He respects not rank or position,
but he mercilessly captures all.131 Every one eagerly
wishes to put off the moment of this catastrophe. No
one prays for death before its time, and no one likes
to hasten to the jaws of this all-devouring demon.
The philosopher may speak of death with sublime
resignation, the theologian may console himself by
depicting death as the birth into a higher life, the
mystic may long for the dissolution of the body as a
heaven-sent liberation of the spirit, but the majority
of humanity thirst for life and thirst for a long life.
The death-toll which Astovidhotu exacts from the
world is appalling. On that account Mithra and
Sraosha are invoked by the faithful to protect them
from the assaults of Astovidhotu,132 and Ahura
Mazda's divine aid protects the child in its mother's
womb from the onslaughts of this demon.133 The man
who marries and rears a family, is hard-working, and
nourishes his body with meat, is able the better to
withstand Astovidhotu than a celibate.134
VIZARESHA
This demon's work. The demon Vizaresha, 'the
dragger away,' lies in wait for the wicked souls at the
gate of hell, when justice is administered to the souls
on the third night after the bodily deaths of men. No
135. Vd19.29.
sooner do the heavenly judges pass [272] their
verdict of being guilty on a soul than Vizaresha
pounces upon his victim and mercilessly drags the
wretched soul into the bottomless hell.135

KUNDA
A demon at the gate of hell. Sraosha is invoked to
smite this demon. The fire of Ahura Mazda routs
136. Yt24.26.
him.136 He is drunken without drinking, and hurls the
souls of the wicked into hell.137 There are spells to
137. Vd19.41.
rout the fiend and his evil progeNy The name occurs
in its feminine form as Kundi.138
BUSHYANSTA
Sloth personified. Idleness and inactivity tend to
strengthen the Kingdom of Evil. The demoness
Bushyansta, or sloth personified, literally
'procrastination,' is commissioned by Angra Mainyu
to inculcate the habit of sleep and procrastination
among mankind. She, the long-handed, as she is
called,139 lulls the whole living world to inordinate
slumber. Timely sleep as such is of Ahura Mazda's
making and it receives even adoratiuon;140 but
Bushyansta, the inordinate, tempts the idle to be
unduly long in bed,141 and thus prevents the practice
of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds.142 At
dawn the cock Parodarsh, whose name literally
means 'one who sees ahead,' flapping his wings and
crowing aloud, warns slumbering humanity of the
stratagem of Bushyansta, and informs the faithful that
it is time to wake up and proceed to work.143 When
Mithra comes in his chariot, he puts the fiend to
flight;144 the Aryan Glory and the holy spells join
hands as well to render powerless this demoness of
laziness.145

138. Vd11.9, 12.
139. Vd11.9; 18.16,
24.
140. VSp. 7.3.
141. Yt22. 42.
142. Vd18.17, 25.
143. Vd18.16, 24. For
general information
about the cock among
ancient Iranians, see
Jackson, Proceedings,
JAOS. 13. lix-lxi; cf.
also Peters, The Cock,
in JAOS. 33. 377-380.
144. Ytl0.97, 13.4.
145. Yt18.2; Vd11.9,
12.

[273]
AESHMA
The demon of wrath. This evil genius of wrath and 146. Yt10.97.
fury, who comes down from the Gathic period, works
147. Y10.8; Yt11.15.
in opposition to Sraosha. He is full of sin,146 and is
147
the wielder of a bloody mace. Ahura Mazda
created Sraosha to counteract his fiendish mischief.148 148. Yt11.15.
The faithful invoke Sraosha to protect them from his
149. Y57.25.
assaults.149 Sraosha hurls his mace at this demon's
150
skull, and the fiend takes to flight before Mithra.
Intoxicating drinks incite men to embrace Aeshma, 150. Y57.10; Yt10.97.
but the recital of the holy spells helps to dispel
151. Y10.8; Yt17.5;
him.151
Vd11.9.
BUITI
The tempter of Zarathoshtra. The nineteenth
chapter of the Vendidad contains an account of the
temptation of Zarathushtra by the Evil Spirit. Angra
Mainyu decreed in his infernal council amid the
bickerings of the demons with one another that Buiti,
who is death unseen, should go to the world and lure
152. Vd19.1-3.
Zarathushtra from his constancy, The righteous one
chants the sacred Ahuna Vairya [Ahunwar] formula
and dispels the demon, who rushes away to report his
inability to overpower the holy prophet.152 Buidhi is
the name of a demon found in Vd11.9, 12, which
may be a variant reading of Buiti.
APAOSHA
The demon of drought. The Yasht dedicated to
Tishtrya gives a picturesque account of the battle

153-154. Yt8.13-19.

waged between the angel of rain and the demon of
drought. Tishtrya assumes three different forms for
ten nights each. For the first ten nights he takes the
form of a youth of fifteen years of age, for the second
ten nights he moves along in the shape of a goldenhorned bull, and the last ten nights in the shape of a
beautiful white horse, with golden ears and a golden
caparison, seeking libations and offerings, so that he
may bestow upon his supplicants oxen, children, and
horses.153-154 When he proceeds to his work of
pouring [274] down water on the earth, he is
confronted by demon Apaosha, who has assumed the
form of a dark horse.155 A severe struggle ensues,
lasting for three days and three nights. Apaosha
comes off first as the victor in the combat and puts
the genius of rain to flight.156 Tishtrya bemoans his
lot and complains before Ahura Mazda that mankind
had neglected to sacrifice unto him. If only he were
strengthened by their offerings, he would carry with
himself on the battlefield the vigour of ten horses,
ten camels, ten bulls, ten mountains, and ten rivers.157
Ahura Mazda, thereupon, offers a sacrifice to the
unfortunate angel and gives him the desired
strength.158 Girt with this added power, Tishtrya now
boldly marches against his rival, and engages in
combat with him, until, to the joy of the waters, and
plants, and lands, and fields, Tishtrya comes out
triumphant and Apaosha is defeated.159
SPENJAGHRI
Apaosha's associate. The name of this demon occurs
but once in the Avesta, in Vd19.40, where Vazishta,
the fire of lightning, is spoken of as smiting
Spenjaghri. We learn from the Pahlavi works that this
fiend works in concert with Apaosha to hinder

155. Yt8.21.
156. Yt8.22.
157. Yt8.23, 24.
158. Yt8.25.
159. Yt8.26-29.

Tishtrya from pouring the rain upon the earth.
AZI
Demon of avarice. On the physical side this demon 160. Vd18.19, 21, 22.
strives to extinguish the household fire, but he is
repelled by Sraosha three times during the night.160 161. Yt18.1.
On the moral side he is the evil genius of avarice.161
Sacrifices are offered to the waters and trees to enable the faithful to withstand him.162
162. Y16.8.
VAYU
A collaborator of Astovidhotu. We have already
seen the good part of Vayu personified as a Yazata.
The other part belongs to the realm of wickedness
and is impersonated by a demon of the same name.
He accompanies the demon Astovidhotu [275] in his
work of bringing death unto creation. He is most
163. Aog. 77-81.
pitiless and his path is most dreadful. A man may be
able to traverse a path that is barred by a flowing
164. Vd5.8, 9.
river, or by a huge serpent, or by a terrible bear, or
by an army, but no man can ever cross the path of
165. Vd10.14.
Vayu and come out safe.163 It is Vayu who hastens his
victim to speedy death by smothering him when he is
drowned or thrown in a burning fire.164 As the good
Vayu and the good wind, Vata, are identical, so are
also the evil Vayu and the devil Vata personifying the
storm-wind.165
MINOR DEMONS
Some of the other demons who are merely
mentioned by name, and about whose characteristics
166. See Gray, op. cit.,
we do not know anything, are Vyambura, Hashi,
Ghashi, Saeni, Buji, Driwi, Daiwi, Kasvi, Akatasha, p. 224-226.
Aghashi, Paitisha, Zaurva, Ithyejah, Spazga, and
other shadowy evil intelligences.166

PAIRIKAS
The fairies. A class of bewitching fairies has been
167. Yt8.8.
created by Angra Mainyu to seduce men from the
right path and injure the living world. Nimble as
birds they go along flying in the shape of shooting 168. Vd11.9, 12.
stars between the earth and the heavens.167 They
come upon fire, trees, and other creations from which 169. Yt8.44.
they are to be driven away by the recital of spells.168
They try to kill Zarathushtra, but in vain.169
Three of the more prominent fairies are mentioned 170. Vd1.10.
by name. They are Khnanthaiti that clave unto King
171. Yt8.51, 53, 54.
Keresaspa, who was bewitched by her looks;170
171
Duzhyairya, corresponding to Dushiyar, or the
fairy of drought according to the Old Persian
172. Darius, Pers. d. 3.
172
Inscriptions, and to Dushyari of the Turfan
manuscript of Mani;173 and Mush.174 Zarathushtra
173. Muller,
tells Angra Mainyu he will smite Khnanthaiti.175
Handschriften-Reste, 2, p.
176
Ahura created Tishtrya to rout [276] Duzhyairya.
15, in Abh. d. kgl.
He keeps her in bonds as a thousand men would keep Preuss, Akad. d. Wiss.,
one man, and if Tishtrya were not to keep her in
Anhang, Berlin, 1904.
check she would extinguish the life of the entire
material world.177 Mithra withstands the Pairikas.178 174. Y16.8.
175. Vd19.5.
176. Yt8.36, 51, 5355.
177. Yt8.54, 55.
178. Yt10.26.
The recital of the Ahuna Vairya and Airyaman Ishya 179. Yt3.5; 11.6;
prayers routs the fairies.179 Zarathushtra asks Ahura Vd20.12.

Mazda to declare that divine name of his by the
utterance of which he may smite the demons and
fairies.180 Ahura Mazda thereupon declares that the
recital of his holy names is most efficacious for
routing the evil ones.181 Haurvatat, Haoma, Ardvi
Sura, Tishtrya, Mithra, Vayu, the Fravashis, sun,
waters, and trees are invoked to give power to
withstand the seductive attacks of the Pairikas.182
Haoshyangha and Takhma Urupi overpowered and
ruled over them.183

180. Yt1.6.
181. Yt1.10, 11.
182. Y9.18; 16.8; 68.8;
Yt4.4; 5.26; 6.4;
10.34; 13.104, 135;
15.12; Sr. 2.13.
183. Yt19.26, 28, 29.

The Yatus, or sorcerers, usually associate with this
class of evil beings.184 The faithful declare in the
Confession of the Faith that they abjure the sorcerers
and those addicted to the sorcerers.185 Ahura Mazda's
names, and the most efficacious prayers Ahuna
Vairya, Ashem Vohu, Yenghe Hatam, and Airyaman
Ishya rout the sorcerers.186 The recital of the hymn to
Sraosha frightens and forces them to flee.187 The
prayers and sacrifices unto the fire,188 the sun,189
Vayu,190 Tishtrya,191 Haoma,192 enable the faithful to
disable the sorcerers. The Fravashi of King Haosrava
is invoked to rout them.193 King Takhma Urupi
subdued them.194 They failed in their attempts to
compass the death of Zarathushtra.195 The West has
derived the term magic from Magi, the priestly class
of the ancient [277] Persians. The Zoroastrian works
of all periods, however, detest sorcery as an evil
creation of Angra Mainyu.196 The verdict of the
Greek writers regarding this is unanimous. Dino
states in his Persica that the Magi abhorred divination
by magic, and Sotion on the authority of Aristotle
and Dino says that sorcery was unknown among the
Magi.197

184. See
Frachtenberg, Allusions
to Witchcraft and other
primitive beliefs in Dastur
Hoshang Memorial
Volume, p. 398-453;
Franklin, Allusions to the
Persian Magic in Classical
Latin Writers, ib., p.
520-534.
185. Y12.4.
186. Y61.3; Yt1.6; 3.5,
9, 12, 16.
187. Yt11.6.
188. Vd8.80.
189. Yt6.4.
190. Yt15.56.

191. Sr. 2.13.
192. Y9.18.
193. Yt13.135.
194. Yt19.29.
195. Yt8.44.
196. Vd1.14, 15.
197. Frag. 5. FHG. 2.
90; Diogenes Laertius,
Prooem. 8; cf. also
Windischmann in
Sanjana's Zarathushtra
in the Gathas and in the
Greek and Roman
Classics, p. 88, 105.
[278]
CHAPTER XXVIII
DEATH AND BEYOND
The theory of rebirth and the binding nature of
Karma become axiomatic truths in India. According
to the Indo-Iranians and their Aryan descendants of
the early Vedic period man came but once to this
world. This one life of man received its completion
after death in the next world. The earthly life was
one of probation. The harvest of the seeds of the
good or evil deeds that man sowed in this world was
to be reaped in the other world. This view of the
future life of man was already undergoing a change in

India during the later part of the Vedic period. The
belief grew that the ideal of life cannot realized
within the limits of a single life upon earth. A long
series of lives were required before the soul can purify
itself of its impurities and win emancipation. By the
sixth century B.C. the theory of the cycle of rebirths
had become the universally acknowledged theory in
India. Man may reap reward and retribution
according to his desert for a temporary period in the
next world, but he had to return to this world to
enjoy or expiate the consequences of his good or evil
deeds that he committed in his past life. Life is living
out actions or Karma in a round of rebirth. To the
philosophers of this period, this world is no longer
what it used to be for the early Vedic seers, the
abode of joy and hope. Not only is this world, in
their view, transitory, its happiness illusive, its hopes
hollow, but it is positively woeful. In such a world of
sorrow and suffering man is condemned to sojourn.
Periodical life in heaven for a pious man between his
death and rebirth is no recompense owing to his
impending life upon earth. Higher than heaven and
greater than virtue's reward is beyond heaven. The
goal of life is the final deliverance from the round of
rebirth, the liberation of the soul from the bondage
of the ever recurring life so that it may rest in the
transcendent peace in Brahma. The one task of
religion and philosophy, therefore, is to teach the
way of emancipation to [279] the weary wayfarer
from the inexorable necessity of treading the rough
and rugged path of the world of woe tens of
thousands and hundreds of thousands of times.
Life is bondage. The bonds that bind the soul to the
world and prolong and postpone the period of its
liberation are actions. The actions are fetters that

bind the soul to the wheel of rebirths. The individual
who goes to heaven or hell after death experiences
reward or retribution according to his desert. But
after a life of many a summer in the world beyond the
grave, when merit or demerit of his good or bad
actions is exhausted, he will have to descend upon
the earth to work out his destiry according to the
residue of the actions of his past earthly life. Thus
will he be compelled to descend upon the earth time
and time again until, freed from all attachments of
actions, he wins emancipation.
As the source of man's actions is desire, it is desire
that keeps the soul rooted to this world. Deliverance
of the soul depends then upon the cessation of desire.
But desire is inseparable from life. It is the very seed
of all existence. It is said that when there was no
existence and no death and Brahma alone breathed
calmly, desire arose in him and the creation came
into being as its consequence.
Yajnavalkya says that man is altogether desire. Karma
results from desire and determines the time of the
deliverance of the soul. Desire, moreover, generates
desire. Like fire, says Manu, that grows stronger
when fed with clarified butter, does the enjoyment of
what man desires, creates in him cravings for still
more. Man desires health and offspring, riches and
glory, and a hundred good things of this life and in
acdition prays for heavenly bliss when he goes to his
final reckoning. Between the dawn and dusk man
performs many actions, good or bad. But even when
they are all good, they are prompted by desire for
profit and power, name and fame, health and
happiness or for the acquisition of some earthly
good. This attachment, craving, hope, and love for

the prize of actions forge fetters round the human
ego and indefinitely postpone the period of its
liberation.
According to the Upanishads, the individual ego
takes up one body and drops it at death and thus the
ego that goes the round of births is ideatical. With
Buddha it is not the same ego for the ego as such
does not exist. There is no eternal soul or spirit of
[280] the individual. Karma alone survives the death
of man. Rebirth is the corollary of Karma. Man is the
child of Karma, for Karma transmigrates and makes
man in its own image. From life to life Karma returns
to the earth in the midst of the environment it has
merited, now reaping the harvest and now sowing
new crops, now treading its steps upward the spiral
ascent and now sliding backward, now unburdening
itself to its accummulated consequences and now
encumbering itself with fresh attachments. Karma,
thus, makes and moulds itself ever anew in every life
from day to day and year to year, until the time that
it has no harvest to reap and becomes devoid of
desire and deeds, so that it wins liberation in Nirvana
of peaceful repose. Life is a little link in the long
chain of limitless lives. Salvation lies not in the
escape from hell but from the whirlings of the wheel
of life. What is feared is the new birth, for it brings
its accompanying sorrows and sufferings. Life is a
wayside inn where the wayfarer halts for some time
while upon his protracted pilgrimage to Nirvana or
the end of his earthly existence.
Jainism likewise teaches that Karma or actions
elongate the chain of rebirths. The ideal of life,
therefore, is to divest oneself of Karma. Actions
should be performed without passion or attachment.

Karma, thus born, lives but a momentary life and
dies. The sooner is the Karma extinguished, the
quicker follows the liberation from the trammels of
existence. It is the life of renunciation accompanied
by bodily mortification that enables man to free
himself speedily from Karma. The soul that wins
liberation lives its individual life of peace and rest in
heaven for ever.
In common with the various schools of philosophy
current at the time, the Gita propounds the theories
of rebirth and Karma. Krishna undertakes to teach
how one bas to perform actions and yet to save
oneself from falling into their imprisoning fetters.
Thus India creates altogether a new eschatological
philosophy. Zoroastrianism, as we shall see,
continues to believe in only one life upon earth and
Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism hold the
same view.
According to Judaism, Yahweh searches the hearts of
men and women and reads their thoughts.. He
weighs their actions, rewards the good and punishes
the evil. Reward and retribution are, however, meted
out in this world. It is at the later period [281] that
the exiles In Babylonia brought with them under the
Persian influence the belief in the compensatory
justice in the life after death.
The mightiest of men cower before death. Every
creature that is born in this earth dies when the
demon of death comes to it.1 The soul is immortal,
and survives the death of the body which is
perishable.2 The ignorant man, intoxicated with the
pride of youth, encircled in the heat of passion, and
enchained by the bonds of fleeting desires, forgets

1. Aog. 40.
2. 5. Ib., 20.
9. Ib., 53-55.
2. Aog. 5-7, 25-28.

the transitoriness and death of the body.3 One who
lives for the body alone comes to sorrow, at the end 6. Ib., 49.
of life, and finds his soul thrown into the terrible den
of Angra Mainyu.4 Man should act in such a way that 10. Ib., 57, 58, 69.
his soul may attain to heaven after death.5 The
individual who blindly seeks the passing good of the 3. Ib., 31-37.
body, thus sacrificing the lasting good of the soul, is
merciless to himself and if he has no mercy on
7. Ib., 56.
8
himself, he cannot expect it from others. This
ignorance brings his spiritual ruin.7 He should not
11. Ib., 59.
live in forgetfulness o f the everlasting life, and lose it
by yielding to his passions. Man sees his fellow-being 4. Ib., 28, 38.
snatched away from this earth, but he grows so
indifferent that he forgets that his own turn may
8. Ib., 39.
8
come to sever his conneetion with this world. The
man may be faring sumptuously in the forenoon, but 12 Ib., 60-68, 85-102.
his fall may come in the afternoon.9 The demon of
death overpowers everyone. Ever since the world
began, and man graced this earth with his presence,
no mortal has ever escaped his clutches, nor shall one
ever escape until the resurrection.10 The priests and
the princes, the righteous and the wicked, have all to
tread the dreary path of death.11 Neither the first
man, Gaya Maretan, who kept the world free from
disease and death, nor Haoshyangha, who killed twothirds of the demons, nor Takhma Urupi, who
bridled and rode on the Evil Spirit, nor Yima, who
dispelled old age and death from his kingdom, nor
Dahaka, who was a scourge to humanity, nor
Thraetaona, who bound Dahaka, Kavi Usa, who flew
in the sky, nor Franrasyan, who hid himself under the
earth, could struggle successfully against death. All
these great and mighty men delivered up their
bodies, when Astovidhotu grasped them by their
hands.12

[282] The recital of the sacred formulas on the
deathbed of man helps his soul when it leaves the
tenement of the body. Life ends in death and dust. It
sleeps on earth to wake in heaven. Bodily death
liberates the soul for a higher life. This period of the 13. Yt22.17.
separation of the body and soul is momentous; it is
full of fear and distress.13 In its utter bewilderment the 14. Yt21.14, 15.
soul seeks help. The recital of a single Ashern Vohu,
pronounced by a man at the last moments of his life,
we are told, is worth the entire zone inhabited by
man,14 and does him incalculable good.
From this world to that which is beyond. The
twofold Gathic division of the universe into the
astvant, 'corporeal,' and manahya, 'spiritual,' is
maintained throughout all the Younger Avestan texts.
One frequently meets with the expressions, 'both the
worlds,' 'this and the next world,' 'this world which is
corporeal, and the next which is spiritual,' 'the
perishable and imperishable,' and the like. Man
stands on the borderland between the material and
spiritual worlds. In the world of the living he lives a
short span of life Here he either works for the
realization of the great ideals that Ahura Mazda has
set up for him, and triumphs; or he falls away from
them, and fails. In the world of the dead, Ahura
Mazda rewards men for having kept his commands,
but visits with retribution all those that have
disregarded his bidding.
Heaven and hell are in the Younger Avesta no longer
conditions of man's being, as they were in the
Gathas, but are actual places located in space. The
process reaches its consummation in the Pahlavi
works, but the beginning is already made.

All souls dwell three nights on earth after death. At
the dissolution of the body, the soul is freed from its
bodily prison. The journey towards the next world
does not, however, begin immediately after death, for
the separation of the soul from the body takes place
by slow degrees. It requires full three days and nights
before the last vestige of the earthly bondage
15. See Farrar, The Life
perishes. The Jews likewise believed that the soul
of Christ, p.457, n.2,
fluttered in the neighbourhood of the body for three
London, 1893.
daY15 The past flashes upon the soul and it recounts
the acts done during its life. It takes its seat near the
16. Yt22.1-6; 24.54.
spot where the head of the deceased rested before
the corpse was removed to the Tower of Silence. If
17. Vd19.27-29.
the soul [283] has walked in the Path of
Righteousness during life, it spends its time in
chanting the sacred hymns, and experiences as much
joy as the whole of the living world can experience
collectively.16 It is anxiously longing for the rewards
which are to take place at the end of the third night
after death.17
Precisely the reverse is the case if the dead happens
to be wicked. The soul of such a one sits near the
skull and clamours in bewilderment and confusion
about the terrible lot that awaits it, and experiences
as much suffering as the whole of the living world
can experience collectively.18
Daena accompanies the soul to the next world. Of
the various spiritual faculties of man, the daena is the
only one besides the soul of which we hear at great
length after the dissolution of the body. It is in the
power of everyone to keep his daena pure by good
thoughts, good words, and good deeds and every one
is enjoined to do so.19 If one does not live according
to this salutary advice and indulges in evil thoughts,

18. Yt22.19-24.

19. Vd10.19.
20. Vd5.62.
21. Yt22.7, 8; 24.55.
22. Yt22.9; 24.56.

evil words, and evil deeds, his own daena delivers
23. Yt22.10-14; 24.57him to the world of darkness.20 On the dawn of the 60.
fourth day after death, the romantic journey of the
soul begins and its voyage into the hereafter is
described in allegorical and picturesque words. The
soul of the righteous one makes its triumphal ascent
to heaven, wending its way among fragrant perfumes,
and amid a wind that blows from the regions of the
south, a sweet-scented wind, sweeter-scented by far
than any which the soul ever inhaled on earth.21
There appears then to the soul its own daena, or
religious conscience, in the shape of a damsel of
unsurpassed beauty, the fairest of the fair in the
world.22 Dazzled by her matchless beauty and
grandeur, the soul halts and inquires who this image
may be, the like of which it had neither seen nor
heard tell of in the material world. The apparition
replies that she is the impersonation of the soul's own
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds in life.
She is nothing more than the true reflex of its own
character. For, when his friends and neighbours in
the corporeal world indulged in wickedness, the spirit
abiding in the true believer always embraced good
thoughts, good words, [284] and good deeds. It was
this righteousness of the soul that had made the
daena so lovely and so fair.23
This is a piece of an allegorical soliloquy on the part
of the soul, in which the consciousness of its having
led a virtuous life on earth brings it inner joy in the
future, and that sweet voice of conscience comforts.
In its flight to heaven which proves to be an eternal 24. Aog. 8.
comfort, such a soul, redeemed by its piety on earth,
is helped by Sraosha, Rashnu, the good Vayu,
Arshtat, Mithra, and the Fravashis of the righteous in
its advance to the realms of final beatitude.24

On the other hand, the soul of the wicked person is
harassed by the thought of its wicked life, and
marches at the end of the third night on the dreary
and dreadful path that lies amid the most foulscented wind blowing from the northern regions.25
The full Avestan text is missing here, but we gather 25. Yt22.25.
from the similar account of the wicked soul's journey
preserved in the Pahlavi scriptures that the soul of the
sinner is confronted by the personification of its own
conscience in the shape of an ugly old woman who
mercilessly taunts it for the wicked life it has led.
All souls have to make their way across the
26. Vd19.29, 36; Sr.
Chinwad bridge into heaven or hell. The righteous
1.30; 2.30.
as well as the wicked souls must needs go to this
Bridge of Judgment, made by Mazda, before they can
27. Vd13.9; cf. Kuka,
be admitted to the realm of the hereafter.26 Dogs are
The Dog in the Vendidad
stationed at the bridge to guard its transit.27 These
in Zartoshti, vol. 1, p.
hounds of the spiritual realm help the pious souls to
271-280, Bombay,
cross the bridge, but the wicked ones long in vain for
1903; Bloomfield,
their aid. The dogs accompany the daena of a good
Cerberus, the Dog of
soul.28 Whoso in the fulness of faith recites the sacred
Hades, p. 27-30,
Ahuna Vairya [Ahunwar] is enabled by Ahura Mazda
Chicago, 1905.
to cross the Chinwad Bridge and to reach paradise in
a threefold manner, namely, unto the best existence,
28. Vd19.30.
the best righteousness, and the best lights.29 Ahura
Mazda proclaims to Zarathushtra certain rules of
29. Y19.6.
righteousness by the practice of which he could pass
over the bridge to paradise.30, Speaking about the
30. Y71.16.
qualifications of a priest, the Heavenly Father informs
the prophet that he shall be called a priest who by his
31. Vd18.6.
wise precepts teaches a man [285] to be of easy
conscience at the bridge.31 In this same connection it
32. Vd13.3.
may be added that the man who has ill-treated the
Vanghapara class of dogs in this world finds not his
33. Vd13.3; 19.30.
way across this crucial bridge.32 Besides the bare

announcement that the righteous souls can cross the
bridge successfully and that the wicked ones fail so to
do,33 we are not furnished with a detailed description
of the judgment at the bridge, although we have this
information explicitly recorded in the Pahlavi
accounts of the fate of the soul after death.
HEAVEN
Four heavens. In contrast to the single heaven
referred to in the Gathas, we meet with a fourfold
division of heaven in the Avestan period. Garonmana
[Garothman], or the Abode of Praise, remains the
34. Vd13.3; 19.30.
highest heaven, the realm of bliss that is reached by
traversing the three lower heavens, calted Humata, or
35. Y9.19; 11.10; 62.6;
Good Thought, Hukhta, or Good Word, and
68.5, 11, 13; Vsp. 7.1;
Hvarshta, or Good Deed, as beatific abodes for the
23.1; Yt12.36; 24.5;
soul. Garonmana, the fourth and the highest heaven,
S1.27; 2.27; Vd19.36.
is frequently designated in the Younger Avesta as the
place of anaghra raochah, or endless light.34 The
36. Vd19.32, 36.
generic name, however, for all the four heavens is
Vahishta ahu, or Best Existence. This heavenly region
37. Yt10.123.
is the shining and all-happy abode of the righteous,35
and in Garonmana dwell Ahura Mazda and his
38. Yt10.32.
heavenly retinue, together with those human souls
that have reached perfection through righteousness.36
39. Yt24.28, 33.
Ahura Mazda offered sacrifice unto Mithra from
Garonmana.37 The faithful beseech Mithra to lay
their sacrifices in Garonmana.38 It is beautiful and alladorned.39
A cordial welcome awaits the pious souls in
40. Vd19.31.
paradise. Vohu Manah, the premier archangel of
41. Aog. 10-13.
Mazda, hails the pious souls on their arrival in
paradise in congratulatory terms,40 and a leader of the
heavenly host, introduces them to Ahura Mazda and 42. Vd7.52.

the other heavenly beings.41 In a different passage
Ahura Mazda himself is depicted as welcoming the 43. Yt22.16.
righteous [286] souls with the same words that Vohu
Manah uses.42 The souls of the righteous persons that
have departed from this world in earlier times join
furthermore in welcoming the newcomers in their
midst.43
The pious enjoy eternally what but few mortals
enjoy, and then only for a short period in this
world. The bountiful host of paradise commands his
heavenly caterer to bring to the souls of the righteous
44. Yt22.18.
the ambrosia;44 a later work adds that this celestial
food is served to the righteous souls by the Fravashis,
45. Aog. 15-17.
while robes embroidered with gold and golden
thrones are supplied to them by Vohu Manah.45 The
46. TdFr. 82. 83.
blessed souls enjoy eternal felicity and incomparable
happiness in this abode of endless light.46 Theirs is
47. Aog. 14.
the lot to receive the everlasting rest which Mazda
has prepared for them, and it is theirs to experience
as much joy as one at the zenith of his greatness
enjoys in this world.47
MISVANA GATU
The intermediary place between heaven and hell.
We have already referred to the probability of the
idea of the intermediary place between heaven and
hell as embodied in the Gathas. The Younger
Avestan texts four times mention a place called
48. Yt1.1; S1.30; 2.30;
misvâna gâtu, 'the place of mixing.'48 It is invoked by
Vd19.36.
name along with Garonmana [Garothman], the
highest paradise, and the Chinwad Bridge. The text
in question, however, do not give us any account of
this place. The Later Pahlavi texts render misvâna gâtu
by hameshak sut gâs, or 'the place of eternal weal,'

which is generally taken to be identical with the wellknown hamistakân of the Pahlavi period.
HELL
Four hells. Simultaneously with the increase in the
number of heavens, there is a corresponding increase
in the list of hells. The Gathas knew but one hell.
The later Avestan texts speak [287] of four abodes of
the damned. They are those of Dushmata, or Evil
Thought, Dushukhta, or Evil Word, and
Dushvarshta, or Evil Deed, together with the fourth
and lowest hell, which has no specific name of its
own in the Avesta, but stands in opposition to the
highest Garonmana, and receives the epithet anaghra
temah, or Endless Darkness.49 The wicked soul reaches
this darkest abode with the fourth stride. The realm
known as duzh ahu, or Evil Existence,50 or again as
achishta anghu, or Worst Existence are designations of
hell in general.51 The regions of hell, if we look to
incidental allusions in the Avesta, are stinking,52
dreadful, and dark.52a
The wicked souls reap in incessant tears the crop
they have sown in the finite world. The gulf of
gloom now yawns for them. The demon Vizaresha
carries off in bonds the wicked souls to their doom.53
Angra Mainyu orders them to be fed with the foulest
and the most poisonous food in hell.54 It is their own
evil doings that bring them to woe.55 They enter hell
terror-stricken, like unto the sheep that trembles
before a wolf.56 A life of sorrow and suffering now
awaits them.57 The Evil Spirit exposes the wretched
souls to the mockery of the infernal rabble.
[288]

49. Yt22.33.
50. Vd19.47;
Vd19.47.
51. Y71.15; Vd3.35;
5.62; 7.22; WFr. 3.2.
52. Vd19.47; TdFr. 93
52a. Aog. 28.

53. Vd19.29.
54. Yt22.35, 36.
55. Vd5.62; 7.22.
56. Vd13.8.
57. TdFr. 84.

CHAPTER XXIX
THE RENOVATION
The greatest of the renovators. Zoroaster in his
religion postulated a renovation of the universe, a
new dispensation in which the world will become
perfect at the last day. We learn from Diogenes, on
the authority of Theopompus and Eudemus, that the
classical authors were familiar with the Magian
doctrine of the millennium and the final restoration
1. Prooem. 9.
of the world as early as in the fourth century B.C.1
Plutarch draws his materials on this millennial
2. Is. et Os.47.
doctrine from Theopompus.2 In the Later Avestan
texts we sometimes miss a clear definition of the
collective judgment of the souls and final
regeneration. But they furnish us with some stray
passages which cursorily deal with the work of the
Renovation at the millennium and of the saviour
renovators who will bring this to pass.
The world progresses towards perfection. Inequity
and wrong are to be ultimately supplanted by equity
and right. The world is to be restored to a veritable
heaven on earth. The goodness of Ahura Mazda
makes it imperative that the entire creation shall
finally be saved. The faithful are confident of this
final event, and they know that this accomplishment 3.Y62, 3; Ny5. 9.
will be the end of the world, when right shall
4. Vd18.51.
triumph supreme. In his daily prayers the true
believer prays that the fire that burns in his house
may remain shining till the day of the good
Renovation.3 Spenta Armaiti, the genius of earth, is
likewise implored to receive and to rear the seed that
men emit in their dreams, and ultimately to deliver
this back as holy men at the time of Renovation.4

According to the teachings of Zarathushtra, every
man or woman is his or her own saviour. Salvation
depends entirely upon the righteous life of the
individual. Besides the individual salvation there is to
be the universal salvation in which the renovators
[289]will finish the work of bringing salvation to all
human beings. The texts speak of certain great souls,
three in number, including the saviour paramount,
that will usher in this period. These are called
Saoshyants in the Zoroastrian terminology. The
Fravardin Yasht5 mentions Ukhshyatereta, Ukhshyatnemah, and Astvatereta as the chief renovators.
Zarathushtra's own kith and kin, a superman of
miraculous powers, born in supernatural manner, will
finally descend upon earth to renovate the world.
Astvatereta, or the Saoshyant proper, will be
immaculately conceived through a virgin called
Vispataurvi, or 'the all-triumphant.'6 He is called
Saoshyant because he will salvage the bodily world,
and Astvatereta because he will save the bodily
creatures from destruction at the hands of the twofooted wicked ones.7 Astvatereta is reflected in the
Gathic expression astvat ashem, ashem being cognate
with areta.8 This Saoshyant par excellence is the most
eminent restorer, he is called the friend of Ahura
Mazda, the meritorious one, who will bring the
mighty work to completion.9 This particular Yasht,10
as just stated, incidentally mentions Zarathushtra's
seed as watched over by ninety-nine thousand nine
hundred and ninety-nine Fravashis. Passages such as
these in the Avesta contain in embryo the doctrine of
the immaculate birth which is later elaborated by the
Pahlavists.
This final Saoshyant will be helped in his great
undertaking by pious comrades or attendants, who

5.Yt13.128.
6. Yt13. 142; 19.92;
Vd19. 5.
7.Yt13. 129.
8. See Bartholomae,
Air. Wb, p. 215.
9. See Casartelli,
Salvation (Iranian), in
ERE. 11. 137, 138;
Pertold, The Origin of
the Idea of a Universal
Saviour in Modi
Memorial Volume, p.
464-474.
10. Yt13.62.

11. Yt19.95.

will be, as the description says, fiend-smiting, of
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and
who are such as have never known falsehood.11 The
Kingly Glory will cleave unto them,12 and the great
Saoshyant will profit the whole bodily world and
withstand the Druj.13
The final reconciliation of the entire creation to its
creator. The world will henceforth neither grow old
nor die, decay nor rot, but will be ever fresh and ever
living; death will be no more, [290] life and
immortality will come to pass forever and the dead
will rise up again.14 Plutarch records that it is the
Magian belief that at the time of the Renovation
mankind will speak one language and have one
commonwealth; men will live without food and they
will not cast shadows.15 Vohu Manah at the time of
this final dispensation will smite Aka Manah; truth
will rout falsehood; Haurvatat and Ameretat will
smite once and for all the fiends of hunger and thirst,
at which moment the deadly Aeshma will bow and
flee helpless forever.16 The demons are believed to
have existed as long as physical and moral imperfections lasted; with the cessation of all such evils, the
fiends will be no more. The Saoshyants will join in
reciting the Airyaman Ishya prayer, and the divine
Kingdom of Ahura Mazda will come to pass, as the
sovereignty of Angra Mainyu will then end.
Impotent, the Prince of Evil will acknowledge his
defeat in the warfare that has gone on for ages
between the powers of Right and Wrong. Bowing
before Ahura Mazda, Angra Mainyu will hide himself
with the demons in the earth.17 The wicked Druj and
her hundredfold brood will forthwith vanish,18 and
with it will disappear all evil propensities in man.
With the disappearance of evil from the universe,

12. Yt19.89.
13. Yt13.129.

14. Yt19, 11,
19,20,23,24,89; WFr.
4.3.
15. Is. et Os. 47.
16 Vt. 19.95,96.
17 Yt19. 96; WFr.
4.2,3.
18 Yt19. 12, 90.

good will prevail everywhere and for all time; and the
accursed name of Angra Mainyu will be forgotten.
Ahura Mazda will be forever, even as he has been
from all eternity.

[291]
THE PAHLAVI PERIOD
FROM THE THIRD TO THE NINTH
CENTURY

[292 is blank]

[293]
CHAPTER XXX
ZOROASTRIANISM UNDER THE FOREIGN
YOKE
Alexander consigns the Zoroastrian scriptures to
the flames. Cyrus had made Persia the queen of Asia,
and it was in Persia that East and West first met. The
history of the Achaemenians was a long struggle of
wars with nations, and a considerable part of this
warfare was a conflict with the West. Alexander

1. Diodorus, 17, 72;
Curtius, 5. 7; Dk., Vol.
9, p. 569.
2. Dk., vol. 9, p. 577.

crushed the Iranian armies at Arbela, and wrested the 3. Dk., vol.9, p. 569.
sceptre from the hands of Darius III, in 330 B.C., and
the structure of the Iranian empire was shattered to
pieces. Great as was this national catastrophe, still
greater was the spiritual loss involved in the
destruction of the holy scriptures of Zoroastrianism,
which perished in the conflagration of Persepolis
when the great conqueror, in a fit of drunkenness,
delivered the palaces of the Achaemenians to the
flames.1 Fire, the most sacred emblem of Iran, was
wantonly utilized in consuming the Word of
Ormazd. The ill-fated Darius had ordered the two
archetype copies to be preserved in the Dizh-iNipisht and Ganj-i Shapigan.2 The first, deposited in
the archives of Persepolis, perished in the
conflagration. The second copy of the sacred
writings, in the Ganj-i Shapigan, we are informed,
was done into Greek,3 though more probably it met
with a similar fate. Ahriman had sent Zohak and
Afrasiab as the scourges to Iran, but their ravages
paled before the irrevocable harm done by this fact
of Alexander's wanton vandalism. Literary Iran has
known him as her arch-enemy, and the Pahlavi
writers have branded him 'accursed,' 'evil-destined,'
and an envoy of Ahriman. After a long period of
darkness, following his ill-destined invasion of Persia,
Iran once more recovered her political autonomy, but
she never regained, in their pristine fulness, the holy
works of her great prophet.
[294] Zoroastrianism thrives better under the
4. Strabo. p. 515.
Parthians than under the Seleucids. The premature
death of the great conqueror brought the end of his
5. Nat. Hist. 30. 6.
ambition of hellenizing Persia. The philhellenic
princes that ruled over the destinies of Persia for the
6. Annales, 15. 24.
long period of five and a half centuries that

intervened between the overthrow of the
Achaemenians and the rise of the Sasanians failed to
accomplish anything in that imperialistic direction.
Disintegration followed almost immediately after
Alexander's death, under the Seleucid satrapies, and
Jess than a century had elapsed before Arsaces
succeeded in founding a strong empire in Parthia
about 250 b.c. We have no means to ascertain the
undercurrents of the religious thought among the
Zoroastrians during this period. From what little
information we get we find that in the Parthians
Zoroastranism found better masters than in the
Seleucids. Mithradates, Tiridates, Rhodaspes, and
Artabanus are some of the names of the Parthian
kings that savour of a partiality for Zoroastrianism.
The Magi exercised a considerable influence at the
Parthian court. They had their place in the council of
the state.4 Pliny informs us that Tiridates, the brother
of Vologeses I, was initiated in the mysteries of the
Magi.5 We have on the authority of Tacitus that he
was a priest.6
Zoroastrian practices embraced by the Parthians. In
the early days of their empire, at least, the Parthians
were strongly influenced by Zoroastrianism in their
religious beliefs.7 They venerated the sacred
elements, especially the fire, worshipped the sun
under the name of Mithra, and in accordance with
the tenets of Zoroastrianism, exposed bodies to the
light of the sun and the birds of prey.8 The fire altar,
emblematic of Iranian influence, is a common feature
on the reverse side of the coins of the Parthian rulers.
Tiridates betrays an exaggerated notion of the
Zoroastrian injunctions for the purity of the
elements, when, invited by Nero to receive the
crown of Armenia, he avoided the sea route and went

7. See Unvala,
Observations on the
religion of the Parthians,
Bombay, 1925;
Pettazoni, La Riligione
di Zarathustra, p. 171.
8. Cf. Rawlinson, The
Sixth Great Oriental
Monarchy, p. 399, 400,
London, 1873.
9. Dio. Cassius, 63. 17.

to Rome by land. Prompted by the same scruples
against defiling water, his royal brother declined
[295] to go to Rome, and invited his Roman
contemporary to Persia.9 One of the five kings of this
royal house that bore the name Vologeses, ordered a
collection to be made of the scattered fragments of
the manuscript material that might have survived the
period that for nearly five centuries threatened theutter destruction of the sacred scriptures of
Zoroaster's faith and menaced even that which was
preserved in oral tradition.10 Nevertheless, Denkard
informs us that all that could be recovered of the lost
Zoroastrian canon at this time was only as much as
could be retained by any one Dastur in his memory.11
Classical references to Zoroastrianism during this
period. Our knowledge about the state of
Zoroastrianism during this period is very scanty, and
the occasional references made by the classical
writers of this time to the religious practices of the
Zoroastrians help us in gaining some more
information of the religious history of the faith. We
have often referred in earlier pages to the works of
Strabo and Diogenes Laertius. who draw their
material from the early Greek writers as well as base
their statements on their personal investigation. We
gather some more particulars on the subject from the
incidental references of other writers. Porphyry (a.d.
233-306) mentions on the authority of Eubulus that
the Magi are divided into three classes, the first and
the most learned of which neither kill nor eat
anything living.12 Diogenes Laertius states that
vegetables, cheese, and bread form their food, and
they content themselves with the plain ground for
their bed.13 Clement of Alexandria (a.d. third century) mentions a sect of the Magi that observed the

10. Dk. SBE., vol. 37,
bk. 4. 24, p. 413.
11. SBE., vol. 37, bk.
8. 1:21, p. 9, 10.

12. De Abstinentia, 4.
16.
13. Prooem. 7.
14. Stromata. 3, p.
191.
15. Strabo, p. 733.

life of celibacy.14 Speaking about the designation by
which the Zoroastrian priests were known in
Cappadocia in his days, Strabo relates that in
addition to their usual name of the Magi, the priests
were called puraithoi, the equivalent of the Avestan
designation athravan, or fire-priest.15
Zoroastrianism spreads its influence abroad. The
Magi had established themselves during the Parthian
period in large numbers in eastern Asia Minor,
Galatia, Phrygia, Lydia, and even in [296] Egypt.
These colonies of the Zoroastrian priests became an
active source of the diffusion of the Zoroastrian
beliefs.16 The rulers of the dynasties established in
Pont us, Cappadocia, Armenia, and Commagene took
16. Cumont, The
pride in tracing'ftheir dynasties to the kings of the
Oriental Religions in
fallen empire. They encouraged Iranian tradition and
Roman Paganism, p.
religion in opposition to the Greek kings of
139, Chicago, 1911.
Pergamon and Antioch. They paid homage to
Oromazes, Omanos, Artagnes. (Verethraghna),
17. Ananikian. Armenia
Anaitis, and Mithra. Mazdaism flourished in Armenia
(Zoroastrian), in ERE. 1.
in a very corrupt form. It was assimilated to local
794-802.
beliefs and Semitic ideas that had penetrated there
from Syria. Aramazd (Ahura Mazda) was recognized
18. P. 512, 732, 733.
as the chief divinity. Spandaramet (Spenta Armaiti),
Haurotmaurot (Haurvatat, Ameretat), Anahit, Tir,
19. P. 732.
Mithra, Vahram (Verethraghna) among the good
heavenly beings, and Arhmn (Ahriman), Azmad
20. 5.27.5.
(Aeshma daeva), Druzh (Druj) among the evil are
included in the theology.17 Strabo informs us that the
Zoroastrian divinities were worshipped in Armenia,
Cappadocia, and throughout North eastern Asia
Minor.18 He mentions having seen in Cappadocia the
image of Omanus, that is Vohu Manah carried in a
procession.19 The people of Pontus remained partially
attached to Zoroastrianism up to the first century,

when they exchanged the faith of Zoroaster with that
of Jesus. Pausanias (second century A.D.), refers to
the Magian rites practised in Lydia in the second
century.20
The appearance of the Zoroastrian angels Atar,
Maongha, Tishtrya, Mithra, Verethraghna, Vata, and
others on the coins of the Indo-Scythian kings from
the time of Kanishka, in the second century, proves
the strong Zoroastrian influence outside Iran.21

21. Cf. Stein.
Zoroastrian Deities on
Inido-Scythian Coins in
Indian Antiquary, vol.
17, p. 89-98.

Zoroastrianism at the close of the Parthian empire.
The fact that some of the Parthian kings were
favourably inclined to Zoroastrianism did not
succeed in saving the Zoroastrian Church from
falling into decay. Heresies and scepticism were
[297] rampant, it seems, and the priesthood was
steeped in ignorance.22 The language of the Avesta
had long ceased to be a living tongue, and the
knowledge of the holy books written in that language
was on its decline. The new language born at this
22. AV. 1. 13-15.
period is Pahlavi, cognate with Parthava or Parthian,
meaning heroic. It is an admixture of Aryan and
Semitic. The Aryan element belongs to the Avesta,
whereas the Semitic element is Aramaic, closely
resembling Syriac. The Magi and the Athravans, the
priests of Western and Eastern Iran, who were now
united undertook the translations of the Avestan
works and their explanations in Pahlavi. The
explanations or commentaries are called âzainti in
Avesta, and Zand in the later tongue.
Mithraism and Judaism were flourishing in Western
Iran and Buddhism in Eastern Iran. A new religion of
great potentiality entered Iran at this period. It was
Christianity, whose propaganda spread in Iran during

the Parthian period. We shall deal in brief in separate
chapters with the spread of Mithraism outside Iran,
and with Christianity, which was destined to grow
into a great spiritual force that confronted Zoroastrianism from the middle of the second century to the
middle of the seventh century, or the downfall of the
last Zoroastrian empire. Five centuries of literary
chaos thus elapsed before the dawn of the real
Zoroastrian reformation dispelled the darkness and
once more illumined the Mazdayasnian world with
new light.
[298]
CHAPTER XXXI
THE BIRTH OF CHRISTIANITY
The teachings of Jesus. Great trading routes had
converged upon Jerusalem and the Jews had long
carried on an extensive commerce with distant
countries. Wealth poured from all quarters and the
rich accumulated vast fortunes. Side by side with all
this opulence, there was growing in large towns a
propertyless, proletarian, discontented class. The
Romans were drawing vast numbers under their yoke
of slavery. Discontent with life upon earth was
increasing among the helpless population. God had
destined man to reap happiness upon earth, but
through the life of inequity and sin, man had lost his
fellowship with God the Father. Out of compassion
for his erring children, God became man in Jesus. He
alone among all, it was given out, could secure
forgiveness of man's sins from God as the mediator
and restore him to divine fellowship. Jesus lived and
suffered, and by his supreme sacrifice of dying as
ransom for humanity, he undertook to save and

redeem mankind.
The world was in great peril and there was no hope
that man could save it. Superhuman help alone could
revive its dying hope. God loved the world and
therefore sent Jesus so that it might be saved through
him. The Saviour of the world speaks authoritatively
not only as a. messenger or a prophet of God, but in
the person of God so that despairing humanity may
find supremest consolation. Jesus knows God, and is
from him. Furthermore he asserts that he and his
Father are one, the Father being in him and he in the
Father. It is the Father who dwells in him that does
the works that Jesus seems to be doing. He owns
those as his kith and kin who do the will of his
Father. They alone will enter the Kingdom of
Heaven after death. Jesus promises eternal life to
those who sacrifice their all to follow in his steps.
God is a spirit. He does not relish burnt offerings and
sacrifices- He demands that man shall worship him in
spirit. He is merciful, forgiving, and just. He makes
[299]the sun rise on the good and the evil, and sends
rain on the just and the unjust. The inhumanity of
man has extinguished all hope in the heart of man
that erring humanity can ever be redeemed. Jesus
consoles man that all hope is not lost. God can help
man in his woe, if only man has faith in God. For,
says he, faith can accomplish what verges on the
border of impossibility. It can move the mountain
and cast it into the sea. Let man love God with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and
with all his strength, and let him love his neighbour
as himself and all will be well with the world. Love
for God and love for God's children are the two
fundamental commandments, says Jesus. Love is the
fulfilment of the law. Humanity's salvation lies in its

faithful practice of universal love. The Kingdom of
Heaven, says Jesus, is at hand and he exhorts his
disciples to preach this gospel of hope throughout
the earth.
Men and women, says Jesus, are the temple of God
and the Spirit of God dwells in them. The world
would be a paradise if they remained true to their
noble inheritance and lived godly lives. But given
freedom of action, they have gone astray from the
path of equity and made life upon earth full of suffering and sorrow. Avarice and envy, jealousy and
hatred have split the world of human beings who
began life upon earth on terms of equality as children
of the common Father, into two antagonizing
factions of the strong and the weak, the rich and the
poor. The strong and rich own and rule the world,
the weak and poor toil and suffer, and the number of
the weak and poor is legion. Jesus comes as the friend
and saviour of the weak and poor. He consecrates
weakness and poverty in his own person and lives his
life as the weakest and the poorest of mankind. He
extols the virtues wedded to weakness and poverty
and preaches a philosophy of life for the rescue and
uplift of the weak and poor, the sorrowing and
suffering.
The philosophy of life that Jesus teaches us has love
for its basic principle. To love one's neighbour as one
loves one's self, is the chief commandment. Love is
the binding force, the bond of unification between
man and God, and man and man. This sphere of love
knows no limits. It is neither tribal, nor communal,
nor national. It is universal. Wherever man meets
man, there love should be. If a man loves God, but
hates his fellow-men, [300]his love for God is false.
The world would change its sombre hue if men were

kindly affectioned with brotherly love. As a sentient
being, man wishes well to himself. Let him only
recognize that his neighbour, his fellowman has equal
right to his own well-being. The golden rule of life
for man, therefore, is, as Zarathushtra and Confucius
had said, to do unto others what he would men
should do unto him.
The world groans under misery, because men wish
evil unto their fellowmen. Evil recompensed by evil
furthers evil. It is incumbent, therefore, upon all to
overcome evil done to them by good. If a wicked
person smites another on one cheek, the injured
person should on no account retaliate but meekly
turn to the aggressor his other cheek. Hate from the
enemy is to be returned with love, his curse with a
blessing, and persecution by him with prayer for him.
If the enemy hungers, he has to be fed and if he
thirsts he is to be given water. In his infinite mercy,
God forgives trespasses of the sinners, even so has
man to forgive him who wrongs him. Forbearance is a
virtue and the strong should bear with the weak. If
one lends something to his neighbour, let him do it
with indifference whether the borrower returns it or
not, because God, in his goodness, will recompense
him. If some one takes away his goods, let him not
pursue the usurper with the object of regaining them.
Man cannot serve both God and Mammon. The root
of all human ills is the love of money. The riches of
the earth can be corrupted by moth and rust and
stolen by thieves. Let man give up his pursuit after
them and let him by his virtue store up for himself his
treasure in heaven, where it shall be imperishable.
Jesus lived and died a poor man. Let man take his
example, and use his wealth, if he has any, for

helping the poor and the needy. And this act of
relieving poverty and distress with his money is to be
done so unostentatiously and with no ulterior motive
but only with the object of discharging his duty
towards his fellow-beings, that his left hand may not
know what his right hand does. Treasure acts as a
snare; it is a source of temptation. Hence it is that a
rich man finds his entrance into the portals of heaven
more difficult than a poor man. Faith and hope
elevate life, but charity is the greatest virtue. It is the
bond of perfection. A man of great possessions
approached Jesus, saying he had faithfully observed
all the commandments [301]and was anxious to be
assured of eternal life. The prophet of God answered
that though he had practised all virtues, he had left
out one and that was charity. He should therefore
return home and sell whatsoever he had and give to
the poor, so that God would reward him with
treasure in heaven. It is practising true religion to visit
the orphans and widows and alleviate their sufferings.
Man does not bring anything into this world with
him when he is born, neither can he take anything
from his amassed fortune when the call of death
conies to him. Contentment with what little he has,
even if it is not beyond his daily food and raiment, is
godly virtue leading to happiness.
Jesus gives a sublime manifestation of humility
throughout his life. He glories in speaking of himself
as a servant of humanity whose pious mission in life is
to minister to the poor and the weak. He who
ostentatiously exalts himself, says he, bsfore his
fellowmen shall be abased by the hand of God, but
whoso humbles himself before all shall win
exaltation. Let him, therefore, who is hailed as the
great among men, minister to the needs of the many

that are far from greatness; and let him who is saluted
as the chief among his compatriots act as a willing
servant of the populace. Jesus gave his life a ransom
for mankind and he exhorts his hearers to practise
such supreme sacrifice. Man instinctively loves life,
but he gains more life and nobler life by losing it as a
sacrifice for the good of others, than by saving it for
the love of self. The best expression of love for others
is the laying down of one's life as a loving sacrifice
for the good of others. So did the Son of Man offer
the very life of his body for the sake of mankind. Let
the children of men hold their lives ready for sacrifice
for one another in their mutual need Love is the
active rule of life; sacrifice is the passive, concludes
Jesus.
The religion of Jesus, as we shall see in subsequent
pages, was destined soon to enter Iran as a rival to
Zoroastrianism.
[302]
CHAPTER XXXII
MITHRAISM
Mithraism is Zoroastrianism contaminated with
Semitic accretions. Of all the Indo-Iranian divinities,
Mithra attained to the greatest prominence during
this period. The Avestan texts constantly speak of
Mithra as the lord of wide pastures, and Mithra
gathered the largest number of flocks under his
protection in the field of spirit. Iranian in its basic
principles, Mithra's cult was soon surcharged with
Semitic accretions and spread far and wide under this
new syncretic form. The Achaemenian kings lived
during winter in Babylonia. Here the Chaldaean

1. Cumont, Les Religions
Orientales dans le
Paganisme Romain,
p.217.

astrolatry or the Semitic star worship was assimilated
with the cult. Planets and constellations whose course
was believed to determine all events of life received
homage. Chaldrean theology assimilated Mithra to
Shamash, the god of the Sun. Thus Mithra, though
distinct from the Sun in Zoroastrian theology, was
united with the Sun and called Sol Invictus or the
Invincible Sun, in the Roman mysteries.1 In Asia
Minor, Mithra was identified with local gods, and
with the Greek gods at a later period. A blend of
heterogeneous elements from Babylonia, Asia Minor,
and Hellenic ideas u1timately gave him such a new
form that his original traits were considerably
concealed from sight.
Plutarch says that the Cilician pirates taken captive in
67 B.C. brought the cult of Mithra to Rome.2 We
have already seen from the activities of Mithra as
described in the Avestan works that besides being the
divinity of light and truth, he was also the tutelary
divinity of the fighting armies. This warlike trait of
Mithra appealed strongly to the martial instincts of 2. Pomp. 24.
the Roman legions that poured forth into the
3. Bhandarkar,
Parthian regions. The Romans recruited their
Vaisnavism, S'aivism, and
auxiliary soldiers from Pontus, Cappadocia,
Commagene, and Lesser Armenia, where the cult was Minor Religious systems
popular, and these soldiers widely diffused it in
in Grundriss der IndoRome. The [303] slaves in the Roman families were Arischen Philologie, 3. 6,
also instrumental in spreading Mithra worship.
p. 153-157,
Mithra rapidly conquered vast dominions for his cult Strassburg, 1913.
in Europe, and brought a large multitude of votaries
from distant lands to his feet. His fame reached the
borders of the Aegean Sea. He came to be
worshipped between India and Pontus Euxinus. He
was the only Iranian divinity who won popularity for
himself in Greece. In the Near East his cult spread in

the different parts of Asia Minor and reached India in
the third century A.D. where it had its root in the
North-Western provinces and Gujarat.3
Mithraism patronized by die State. Mithraism
prospered everywhere under the patronage of the
emperors. Antiochus I, king of Commagene on the
Euphrates, in his epitaph (about 35 B.C.) pays
homage to Ahura Mazda, Mithra, and Verethraghna
and orders that the priests shall put on Persian dress
at the festivals, shall clothe the images in Persian
costume and shall cover them with golden diadems.4
Antiochus is shown in relief clasping the right hand
of Mithra, who appears in Persian costume with
radiate nimbus. Mithra appears on horseback in
Persian costume on coins. Nero5 desired the Magi
who accompanied Tiridates, King of Armenia, to
initiate him in the mysteries of Mithra. Diocletian,
Galerius, and Licinius dedicated a temple to Mithra,
and Diocletian officially recognized Mithra as the
protector of his empire in 307 A.D. During the
middle of the third century, Mithraism was at thc
height of its triumph, and it seemed as if all Europe
would turn Mithraic.

4. Dittenberger,
Orientis Graeci
Inscriptiones Selectae, vol.
1. p. 598, Leipzig,
1903-1905.
5. 54-68 A.D.

Mithraism was thus honoured by the emperors
because it encouraged and supported their autocratic
pretensions. The emperor was theoretically the first
magistrate of Rome and derived his authority from
the people. Mithraism brought the idea of hvarena
6. Hj. Inscr. 1-4.
[khwarrah] or Kingly Glory with it from Iran. This
7. Yt10.16, 128, 141.
Kingly Majesty was a shining halo that descended
upon the king. It encircled his head and made his
person sacred. It was believed to be inherent in the
person of the king, who proclaimed himself the
descendant of divinity or divinity in the flesh.6 It

came to [304] be known by the name of Destiny and
every country and every city in the Orient
worshipped its Destiny. The Semites called it gadâ. It
was rendered among the Greeks as Tyche.
Alexander's successors adoptcd it to strengthen their
royal position that they had usurped, and established
the worship of the Glory or Tyche of the king.
People swore by the Tyche of King Seleukos. The
kings of Cappadocia, Pontus, and Bactriana honoured
the Glory. The Seleucids proclaimed themselves the
favourites of the Glory or Forture and thus ordained
to rule by the grace of God. The Yasht dedicated to
Mithra speaks of him as the giver of Glory.7 It was
this function of Mithra of dispensing the Kingly
Glory that made him the favourite of the Roman
emperors who likewise declared themselves possessed
of this divine Glory. They ruled with absolute power
in the name of God, and ordered this goddess of their
own person to be worshipped. A number of
theophorous or god-bearing names compounded
with the name of Mithra were used enthusiastically.
The creed. The supreme godhead is Kronos, Time,
known in the Avestan texts as Zrvan Akarana or
Boundless Time. He is devoid of name, sex, and
passions. He is the First Cause. The Sun is his
physical manifestation. In sculptures he represented
as a lion-headed human monster. A serpent encircles
7. Yt10.16, 128, 141.
his body. He holds the sceptre and the bolts of
sovereignty and holds in each hand a key to the gates
8. Is. et Os. 46, 47.
of heaven. He is the creator and destroyer. He
created Heaven and Earth. The Earth begot the
Ocean. The Heaven is Ormazd, or Jupiter; the Earth
is Spenta Armaiti or Juno, the Ocean is Apam Napat
or Neptune. Atar or Vulcan is the angel of fire.
Sharewar or Mars is the genius of metals. Haoma or

Bacchus personifies plants. Drvaspa or Silvanus is the
genius of agriculture. Anaitis or Venus and Cybele is
the goddess of water. Vanainti or Nike is the angel of
victory. Asha or Arete presides over virtue. These
Iranian Yazatas that have accompanied Mithra were
worshipped under Greek and Latin names. With
other divinities they dwell on the sunlit summits of
Mt. Olympus. Fire, wind, water, and earth are the
four steeds that drive the chariot of the Supreme
God. The Sun goes his daily round in his chariot.
The moon drives in a cart drawn by white bulls.
Verethraghna is likened to a bellicose and destructive
boar, one of the forms [305] in which he manifests
himself in the Avestan texts. The exploits and
achievements of other Yazatas are ascribed to Mithra.
As God is unknowable and unapproachable, Mithra
acts as the Mediator between God and mankind.
Plutarch says that Oromazes dwells in eternal light as
far above the sun as the sun is above the earth and
Ahriman lives down below in darkness. Mithra, he
says, occupies an intermediary place between them.8
Ahriman or Pluto, according to Mithraism, is born
like Ormazd of Boundless Time, and lives deep down
in hell. He assaulted the heavens with his infernal
crew, but was repulsed and driven back to hell.
The creation of the material world begins when
Mithra combats the primeval Bull. His painful
struggle with the Bull symbolizes the sufferings of
mankind upon earth. He triumphs over the Bull and
puts him in a cave where at the command of the Sun
he ultimately kills him reluctantly, that he may
thereby create and save mankind. The moon gathers
and purifies the seed and the different kinds of
animals are born. The soul of the Bull is taken under
the protection of the dog, the faithful companion of

Mithra, to heaven, where he becomes the guarding
genius of cattle. The first human couple is now
created and Mithra is set to guard it. Ahriman strives
to kill it, as he had previously struggled to kill the
Bull. He causes pestilential scourges and protracted
drought but is baftled in his aim. He then causes a
universal deluge, from which one man, forewarned by
God, makes a boat for himself and his cattle and is
saved. Then follows a huge conflagration which
brings great destruction. The creation of Ormazd
thenceforth lives and thrives. Mithra's work of
creation being finished, he retires to heaven and
guards the world from above.
Mithraic ethics. In Rome, Mithraism is the religion of
the emperors and soldiers and Mithra exalts active,
rigorous, military virtues. He is himself ever wakeful
and demands wakefulness, agility in his votaries. He
is the divinity of truth and justice and he guards
them, fights against falsehood and injustice and
requires that his worshippers will practise these
cardinal virtues. Man's chief function in life is to
combat evil actively on behalf of God. The fighting
armies look to him for help and he never fails them.
He helps the good in this life in their struggle for
[306] existence and assures them of salvation in the
next. There is the esoteric side of Mithraism in which
the aspirants to the Mithraic mysteries had to
practise strict self-control. The neophytes had to
undergo repeated lustrations and ablutions to cleanse
their souls of sin. They had to live austere lives and
perform elaborate occult ceremonies most
scrupulously. There were seven degrees of initiation
in which the mystic successively assumed the names
of Raven, Occult, Soldier, Lion, Persian, Runner of
the Sun, and Father and put on sacred marks

appropriate to the names. He was made to undergo
these seven degrees of initiation to enable him to
acquire wisdom and holiness. Only those that passed
through all the seven degrees became participants in
the mysteries.
The Mithraic sanctuaries were in caves and grottoes.
Fire burnt perpetually on the altar in the deep
recesses of the subterranean crypts. The heavens
were believed to be a solid vault and became
symbolic of Mithra born from the rock. Greek art
was enlisted in the service of Mithraism. Mithraic
monuments represent in stone Mithra in the act of
immolating the Bull, Mithraic legends, cosmogony,
and mysteries.
Mithraic eschatology. The soul is immortal. It
receives the reward or retribution according to the
life it led upon earth. Mithra presides over the
tribunal that judges the souls. As the heavenly
Mediator, he helps the good to ascend to heaven and
welcomes them as children returning from a distant
journey. Woe unto the souls of the wicked, for they
are dragged to hell by Ahriman and submitted to
untold tortures.
There are seven heavens one above the other. These
spheres are conjoined to the seven planets. A ladder
takes the pious souls from one story to another.
When the souls have traversed the seven zones, they
enter the last paradisaic abode of eternal light and
beatitude. At the end of time, Ahriman will destroy
the world. Mithra will then come down upon the
earth and will bring about the I resurrection of the
dea:d. The dead that have come to life again will
recognize one another. Mithra will separate the
righteous from the wicked. A bull, akin to the

primeval Bull, will appear on earth. Mithra will
immolate it and give its fat with wine to the righteous
that will make them immortal. Ormazd will let his
fire fall upon the wicked and end their lives. Ahriman
and the demons will perish in the conflagration. The
[307] will be renovated and the good will enjoy
happiness time without bound.
Christianity triumphs over Mithraism. The Jews had
settled in large numbers in the Roman cities. Paul, a
disciple of Jesus, travelled far and wide to preach his
master's faith. The religions of the East had for long
time exercised great influence in Rome. Besides the
Mithraic mysteries, the worship of Isis and Osiris
from Egypt and the mysteries of various other
systems were popular among the masses. Cultured
men had ceased to believe in the ancient gods of
Rome. They drew their inspiration from Greek
philosophy, reproduced in the works of Cicero and
Seneca. This Hellenistic-Roman philosophy was
gradually losing its hold on those who thought man
could not, unaided, gain divine knowledge and
happiness. Man's salvation, they thought, could not
be found in the world of sense. The religions from
the East had long inspired all to turn their gaze from
the earthly to the heavenly world, a supersensuous
world, presiding over by a divinity who prescribed
principles of moral conduct with divine authority and
promised to give to the multitude peace and
happiness in heaven, which they strove in vain to
find upon earth. Pagan philosophers were vague over
the belief in the future life. Christianity made it its
fundamental doctrine, and entered Rome with words
of comfort to all who laboured and were heavy laden
in their lives of suffering upon earth. It gave them
assurance of future recompense. The teachings of the

new religion were eagerly listened to by the common
people. New converts refused to pay divine homage
to the emperor as was the prevailing custom in Rome.
They were persecuted, yet the number of followers
steadily grew. Periodical persecutions of the new sect
drove many to martyrdom and after bitter struggle it
gained a firm footing. The Roman empire was now
on the decline. Christianity rose in influence after the
death of Marcus Aurelius. It won a legal recognition
during the early part of the fourth century. A century
after Constantine, the Church became all-powerful.
The disciples of Jesus won the Roman world with the
gospel of love. By taking over the Hellenistic-Roman
philosophy, they worked out a rational dogmatic
theology that could satisfy both the spirit and the
intellect.
The conversion of Constantine to Christianity was a
turning [308] point in the destinies of Mithraism.
The cult ceased to be recognized and was tolerated
to exist. Hostility against it began under his
successors and persecution followed. A reaction
followed under Julian the Apostate (A.D. 361-363),
who was initiated in the mysteries of Mithra in his
youth and who considered himself under the
protection of Mithra. He openly passed elaborate
purificatory ablutions to wipe out the stains he had
contracted when he had received the baptism and the
communion of Christianity. As soon as he ascended
the throne, he introduced Mithraic worship at
Constantinople and celebrated the first taurobolia at
Athens. He was the last pagan to occupy the throne
of the Caesars, the last who was an ardent worshipper
of Mithra. His premature death put an end to the
reactionary movement. The victory of Theodosius in
394 A.D. extinguished all hopes of its revival by the

aristocracy that was still faithful to the cult.
Mithraism, which had originated among the enemies
of Rome, remained her religion for two hundred
years. It fell when it lost the protection of the State.
Christianity now triumphed over its great rival.
Mithraism lingered in the Alps and Vosges and in the
out of the way places for considerable time. It
perished, but not without leaving its mark behind,
and many of its beliefs and ritualistic practices and its
art influenced Christianity. The votaries of Mithra
used to celebrate the birth of the Sun on December
25, because at the winter solstice light triumphed
over darkness and the lengthening of the day began.
The Christians chose this day as the feast of the
Nativity of Christ, which is celebrated to this day.
[309]
CHAPTER XXXIII
ZARATUSHT IN THE PAHLAVI WORKS
Miracles as credentials of a prophet's mission as
God's messenger. Credulity creates miracles. They
are due to man's hunger for the marvellous, his
disposition to believe in the impossible, and his
readiness to give credence to the incredible. They
flourish where childlike innocence, ignorance is
ready to be duped and deluded. The faith of the
masses rests on the foundation of signs and prodigies,
portents and miracles. Perternatural interference with
the course of nature has been a commonplace
everywhere. The omnipotent God, it has always been
agreed, could change anything and everything at his
own free will, and so he could set aside the physical
laws that govern the universe. Miracles transcend
natural laws. The prophets are believed to have been

endowed with the power of producing supernatural
events. The multitude always look upon them to
work wonders that would establish their supernatural
mission. The miracles strengthen the faith of the
masses in the messengers of God. The movements of
the prophets are devoutly magnified into miracles
and credulous persons are always found to attest, as
witnesses, the working of miracles. Buddha
condemned miracles in most emphatic words, yet
tradition has invested him with many more miracles
than have been ascribed to any other prophet.
Mohammed is asked to work miracles to prove the
divinity of his mission as Noah and Abraham, Moses
and Jesus had done. He is asked to cause the dumb to
speak, the deaf to hear, the blind to see, the dead to
rise, and to change the course of nature. Mohammed
replies that the Koran itself is the greatest miracle
and he cannot work other miracles. Yet pious
credulity, during the second generation, credits him
with several miracles.
Legend grows about the prophet of Iran that
obscures his personality. The Pahlavi works that
give us the account of the happenings in the life of
Zaratusht have been written in about [310] the ninth
century, or about two thousand years after the
passing away of the prophet. The holy figure has
grown very distant and dim. The real events of his
life have been obscured by the long centuries,
particularly the five centuries of chaos that followed
Alexander's conquest of Persia. The piety of the
adherents of his faith has burnt so much incense in
his sacred memory that his face has got almost
beyond recognition. We know everything of the life
of Mohammed; we know something of the lives of
Buddha and Jesus; we know practically nothing of the

life of Zoroaster. The materials that we have in the
Pahlavi works relating to him are not historical and
authentic; they are legendary and mythical. Portents
herald his birth and archangels attend his nativity.
Legendary accounts of the miraculous conception
and birth and childhood of Zaratusht supersede the
matter-of-fact information that the Gathas give. The
Pahlavi writers have before them the examples of the
legendary stories of the miraculous incidents
connected with the lives of Moses, Buddha, and
Jesus, circulated in Iran by the followers of these
prophets. It is probable that their writings have been
influenced by these foreign sources.
The Pahlavi works. The Spend Nask, which is lost, is
said to have contained the account of the birth and
childhood of Zaratusht. The materials that have been
preserved in the Denkard, the Selections of Zadspram, and
some scattered passages in other Pahlavi works make
up the literature on the life of the prophet that came
into existence during the Pahlavi period.
The classical writers of the period on Zoroaster.
From the time of Porphyry, who visited Persia and
wrote in the latter part of the third century, to the
time of the late Latin writers, all who speak about
Zoroaster reproduce in the main all that is written by
the early Greek and Roman writers. Some of them
have been influenced by what they heard from the
Zoroastrian sectarians during their days. Porphyry,
for example, quotes Eubulus and says that Zoroaster
dedicated a cave to the worship of Mithra and adds
that it is from the practice introduced by him that
peoples conduct their holy rites in caves and
grottoes.1 Photius, who wrote in the latter part of the
ninth century, ascribes the Zarvanite doctrines to

1. Fox and Pemberton,
p. 86.
2. Ib., p. 125.
3. Remy, The Influence of
India and Persia on the
Poetry of Germany, p.
13, New York, 1901.

Zoroaster and [311] says that he represented Zaruan
as the author of Hormisdas and Satan.2 The fiction
that magic originated with Zoroaster persists and is
repeated from the classical and patristic works by
very late writers. In the Faust-legend, Zoroaster
figures as the prince of magicians whose book Faust
studies so diligently that he is called a second
Zoroastris. This book passes into the hands of Faust's
pupil Wagner, who also studies it with as much
diligence as his master did.3
The date and place of Zaratusht. The Avestan
works, we have seen, are silent over the question of
the period when Zarathushtra flourished. Of the two
main sources of information on this problem, namely
the classical and the traditional, the latter is based on
a few passages occurring in Bundahishn,4 Arda Viraf,5
and Zadspram.6 The barest information we gather
from these solitary passages is that Zaratusht opened
his prophetic ministry in the thirtieth year of the
fabulous reign of one hundred and twenty of King
4. 34. 1-9.
Vishtaspa. The religion remained in undisturbed
condition for three hundred years and in the three
hundredth year of its foundation, Alexander invaded 5. 1. 2-5.
Persia. The Arabic and Persian writers reproduce this
6. 23.12.
statement in their works. The repetition of this
legend by a host of the later writers seems to have
given it a semblance of historic data. Tradition which
is oblivious of the existence of the most renowned
Persian kings Cyrus and Darius and Xerxes, which
confounds the later Achaemenian kings with the
Kianian, which complacently accords a reign of one
hundred and twenty years to Vishtaspa, which
disposes of the rule of four hundred years of the
Parthians in forty pages, which does not provide us
with fifty pages of materials on the religious and

social life of Zoroastrians during the five hundred
years that intervened between Alexander and
Ardashir, the founder of the Sasanian dynasty — is
not a safe guide to follow. Both the classical date
6000 B.C. and the traditional date 600 B.C. are not
acceptable; for its extravagance, the other for its
unreliability. The date, as also the place of the birth
and death of Zoroaster, will, probably never be
established with any certainty, for no data [312] exist
to enable us to determine them with any accuracy.
These questions will, probably, ever remain
questions. The safest course for a writer upon these
problems is to imitate the Pahlavist and endorse the
frequently repeated phrase he employs whenever
confronted with any insoluble question; am lâ roshan,
'I do not know.'
The birth of Zaratusht. Long before the advent of 7. Dk. SBE., vol. 47,
Zaratusht, King Yima forewarns the demons that he bk. 7.2. 59-61, p. 31.
will come to fight them.7 A marvellous ox, in the
8. Zsp. 12.12, 15, 16;
reign of Kaus, likewise, foretells the coming of
8
revelation through Zaratusht. Preparations are made Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk.
in heaven for bringing about the birth of the prophet. 7.2. 62, 64, 67, p. 3133.
The Kingly Glory descends upon earth and enters
the house in which lives the woman who is destined
to give birth to the prophet-child. It mingles with her 9. Zsp. 13.4; Dk.,
SBE., vol. 37, bk. 8.14.
when she is born. Owing to the Glory that has
descended upon her, she is surrounded by a luminous 1, p. 31; vol. 47, bk.
light. The demons mislead her father into the belief 7.2. 2-10, p. 17-19;
Jackson, Zoroaster,
that she is bewitched. The father thereupon sends
her away to the clan of the Spitamas. When she came p.24.
of age she married Pourushasp.9 The demons struggle
10. Dk. SBE., vol. 47,
at every step to bring harm upon them, but are
baffled in their vile attempts by the intervention of bk. 7. 2. 22-55, p. 23the heavenly beings. Vohuman, Ardwahisht,
30; Jackson, ib., p. 24,
Khurdad, and Amurdad miraculously bring about the 25.

mingling of the Glory, spirit, and body of the child in
the womb of the mother.10 For three nights did a
11. SLS. 10. 4.
hundred and fifty demons rush to the house where
Dughdo lived and they struggled to destroy the child 12. Dk., SBE., vol. 47,
in her womb. but owing to the fire burning in her
bk. 7.2. 56-58, p. 30,
11
abode they failed in their foul purpose. For three
31.
nights before the birth of the child, the village of
Pourushasp became all luminous and people
13. Zsp. 14. 12. 16;
marvelled at it.12 The struggle between the powers of Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk.
light and darkness continues, marvels and wonders
8. 14. 2; 9. 24. 1-10, p.
take place one after another, a divine light flashes
31, 226-229; vol. 47,
forth from the house and in the midst of universal
bk. 5. 2. 2, 5. p. 122,
13
joy, the child is born, laughing outright at birth.
123; bk. 7. 3. 2, 3. 25.
p. 35, 41; Jackson, ib.,
p. 27.
[313] Zaratusht's childhood. Pourushasp is afraid
and consults the wizard Durasrob about the
extraordinary child. Durasrob conspires with his
wicked companion Bratrakresh to kill the child. He
stretches out his hand to strangle the child but finds
to his dismay that his hand is miraculously
withered.14 Durasrob works upon the superstitious
fear of Pourushasp and frightens him with evil
consequences to himself and his family if the child
should grow to age. The credulous father becomes of
one mind with him. A great fire is kindled and the
child is thrown into it. A great wonder is manifested
to the people for the fire does not burn the child.15
Durasrob devises other means of destruction and
throws the child one day at the feet of oxen another
day at the feet of horses, but when he is baffled in his
evil intent and the oxen and horses do not kill the
child, he approaches the lair of a wolf and when the
mother has gone out he kills the cubs and puts the
child near them. The wizard is confident that when

14. Zsp. 16. 2. 3; Dk.,
SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3.
4-6. p. 35, 36; Jackson
ib., p. 28.
15. Zsp. 16. 7; Dk.,
SBE., vol. 47. bk. 7. 3.
8-10, p. 36, 37;
Jackson, ib., p. 29.
16. Zsp. 16.5. 6, 8-11;
Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk.
7. 3. 11-19, p. 37-40;
bk. 5. 2. 4, p. 122,
123; Jackson, ib., p.
29.
17. Dk., SBE., vol. 47.
bk. 7.3. 33, p. 43;
Jackson, ib., p. 31.

the wolf will find on her return her cubs killed, she
will mangle the child in revenge. Srosh and Vohuman 18. Zsp. 17. 1-6; Dk.,
SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3.
guard the child and the wolf stands amazed at a
distance with her mouth closed and fails to hurt the 34-43, p. 43-45;
child.16 Durasrob persists in his evil work of causing Jackson, ib., p. 31.
injury to the child, by practising witchcraft upon it.17
At his tender age, Zaratusht enters into controversy 19. Zsp. 19. 7. 8; Dk.,
with Durasrob and condemns him and his associates SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3.
for their evil practices.18 Durasrob is ultimately
44, 45, p. 45, 46;
baffled, acknowledges his defeat and retreats, and
Jackson, ib., p. 32.
when he has gone a little distance, he falls from his
horse and expires.19
Zaratusht's youth. The Avestan and Pahlavi works
declare the age of fifteen as the proper time of
puberty for both boys and girls.20 When Zaratusht
was fifteen years of age he passed through the
ceremony of the investiture with the sacred girdle.21
In all ages when everybody lives for himself there is
somebody [314]who lives for all. That somebody in
the settlements of Pourushasp was Zaratusht, who
chose to live for all. From chidhood, kindliness,
sympathy, mercy, and generosity had written their
marks on his face. He radiated benevolence around
him. He shed joy and happiness on all who came
near him, and communicated his goodness to them.
He had boundless sympathy and love for all the poor
and could not bear to see them suffer. He had keen
ears for the suppressed sighs and silent sorrows of
suffering humanity. He practised liberality and
generosity, he nourished the poor, and gave fodder
to cattle, he saved the lives of those in peril of losing
it.22 According to the custom of the times,, his father
Pourushasp selected a bride for him, but he requested
that he should himself see her face to face and
converse with her.23 He leaves the house of his

20. Y9.5; Yt14.17;
Vd14.15; Dk., vol. 15,
bk. 8.19.95, p. 79.
21. Zsp. 20.1.2.
22. Zsp. 20.4,6, 10,11,
14-16; Jackson, Cf., p.
32, 33.
23. Zsp. 20. 12, 13.
24. Zsp. 20.7.

parents in search of knowledge and righteousness.24
The Pahlavi texts do not give us any details of the
years that he spent in acquiring wisdom and
practising righteousness. He thought and inquired
and studied and began to live the heavenly life upon
earth and piously strove to become the ideal
expression of Ormazd in bodily life.
Zaratusht meets Vohuman. In the thirtieth year of
his life Zaratusht was one day going to attend the
celebration of the season festival. Weary of walking
he rested awhile on a solitary plain, when he saw in a
vision a concourse of people headed by his cousin
Medyomah come victoriously to greet him.25 One
morning he happened to cross four channels of the
river Daiti in order to fetch water for the
performance of the Horn ceremony. As he came out
from the water and was putting on his clothes, his
sight fell upon a handsome man in resplendent
raiment bearing in his hands a spiritual staff,
emblematic of religion. He was Vohuman, the
heavenly premier of Ormazd. He accosted Zaratusht
and asked him who he was and what was his desire.
Zaratusht thereupon gave him his acquaintance and
said that he was in search of righteousness and added
that he was not only in quest of righteousness but
also of the very source from which righteousness
originates. Vohuman readily acquiesced and said that
he would take him to the most beneficent lord who
was the heavenly father of both of them. Then they
[315] marched onward, Vohuman walked first and
Zaratusht followed. As they walked together,
Zaratusht saw that Vohuman was as tall as three
men's spears and that he had to take ninety steps to
cover the space that Vohuman did in nine steps. As
they came within twenty-four feet of the

25. Zsp. 21. 1-3;
Jackson, ib., p. 40.
26. Zsp. 21. 4-13; Dk.,
SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3.
51-61; 4. 29; Jackson,
ib., p. 36, 40, 41.

Amshaspands, Zaratusht could not see his own
shadow on the ground, for so great was their
brilliance.26
Zaratusht confers with Ormazd. When Zaratusht
approached the august assembly, he paid homage to
Ormazd and the Amshaspands and took his seat
among the inquirers. In the conversation that follows,
Zaratusht puts questions and Ormazd gives his
replies. Ormazd explains to him the excellence of the
triad of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds
and the mode of best conduct. Ormazd further
acquaints him with the existence and nature of the
two primeval spirits. Zaratusht gets the beatific vision
of the omniscient wisdom of Ormazd three times
27. Zsp. 21. 14-27; 22.
during the day and the remaining six Amshaspands
2; Jackson, ib., p. 42.
exhibit to him the three ordeals by fire, molten metal,
and knife. He is made to walk three steps on fire
reciting the words, 'good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds,' and he is not burnt. Hot metal is,
likewise, poured on his chest and he is not hurt. In
the third ordeal, the vital parts of his body are cut
with a knife so as to let the blood flow from the
wound, which is healed by passing hands over it.
These ordeals, Zaratusht is told, are to be undergone
by the leaders of religion to prove the steadfastness
of their faith when occasions demand it of them.27
Zaratusht's seven conferences with the
Amshaspands. When Zaratusht returns from his
conference with the Amshaspands, he opens his
ministry and begins to unfold his divine message to
mankind. The Kiks and Karaps opposed him and he
rebuked and repudiated them in strong terms. The
disbelievers clamour for his death, but the Turanian
Aurvaitadang saves him.28 Ahriman and the demons

28. Dk., SBE., vol. 47,
bk. 7. 4. 1-20; Jackson,
ib., p. 42, 43.
29. Dk., SBE., vol. 47.
bk. 7. 4. 36-45.

assail Zaratusht and contemplate his death. Zaratusht
routs them and buries them in the earth by the recital
of the Ahunwar.29
During the first decade of his ministry, Zaratusht had
altogether [316] seven conferences individually with
each of the Amshaspands at different places. In these
conferences, each Amshaspand exhorts Zaratusht to
teach mankind to preserve and protect the particular
material creation that is under his protection.
Vohuman thus pleads for the proper maintenance of
animals, Ardwahisht for fire, Shahrewar for metals,
Spandarmad for earth, Khurdad for water, and
Amurdad for plants.30

30. Zsp. 22. 1, 3-12;
Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk.
7. 4. 1, p. 50; vol. 37,
bk. 8. 14. 3, p. 31, 32;
Jackson, ib., p. 46-49.

Zaratusht at the court of king Vishtasp. Zaratusht at
the court of king Vishtasp. At the tenth year of his
ministry and at the close of his conferences with the
Amshaspands, Zaratusht wins his first convert.31
31.Zsp. 23. 1,2,8.
Greater triumph, however, is now in store for the
prophet of Ormazd. He is led by Ormazd himself to
32. Sg. 10. 64-66; Dk.,
the court of king Vishtasp, where he succeeds in
winning over the king and his courtiers by means of SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 4.
64-66, 71, p. 64-66;
his persuasive preaching, the presentation of the
bk. 5. 2. 8, p. 75. 76;
testimony of the Amshaspands for the truth of his
32
Jackson, ib., p. 57-59,
doctrines and by the working of many miracles.
The Kiks and Karaps at the court of Vishtasp were
62.
alarmed at the prophet's success. They challenged
him to prove the truth of his utterances and
33. Zsp. 23. 5; Dk.,
propounded thirty-three questions to him. Zaratusht SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 4.
answered them to the satisfaction of all present and 67, 69, 71, 73, p. 65to the utter embarrassment of the disputants. The
67; 5. 6, p. 75.
unscrupulous priests of the old faith thereupon tried
to ruin Zaratusht's influence at the royal court by
intrigues. They arraigned him before the king and
succeeded in getting him imprisoned. Zaratusht

worked a wonder upon the favourite horse of
Vishtasp and obtained his release.33
Ormazd then sent Vohuman, Artavahisht and the
Fire Burzin Mitra to the court of Vishtasp to plead on
behalf of the prophet and his religion. Confusion and
terror overtook the king and courtiers and they began
to tremble at the sight of the august personages. But
the Fire of Ormazd assured them that they were not
the emissaries of Iran's enemy, Arjasp and the
Khyons, come to demand tribute from them, nor had
they come to rob the king of his possessions, but
they were deputed by Ormazd himself. The heavenly
envoys advised the king to extend his royal
34. Bd. 17. 8; Zsp. 23.
patronage to the new religion. They promised [317]
7; Dk., SBE., vol. 47,
him a long reign and a long life of one hundred and
bk. 7. 74-86, p. 67-71
fifty years and an immortal son. They warned him at
p. 77; 6. 13, p. 81; vol.
the same time of the evil that would fall upon him if
37, bk. 8. 11.2, 3, p.
he did not embrace the faith. In pious obedience to
24; Jackson, ib. p. 65the divine behest, Vishtasp adopts the religion of
67.
Zaratusht. Ormazd thereupon commands Neryosang
to hasten to the court of Vishtasp with the elixir of
35. Sg. 10.67,68.
life and asks Artavahisht to hand it to the king. The
archangel puts the elixir in a beautiful saucer and asks
the king to quaff it. On drinking the lifegiving
potion, the king falls in a trance and sees marvellous
things of the celestial world. He now asks his royal
consort to accept the faith, which she readily does.
The triumph of the new religion is achieved.34
Faithful to his undertaking, Vishtasp lives and works
and fights for the religion. His brother and sons go to
India and other distant places to propagate the new
faith.35
The passing away of the prophet. Zaratusht lives for 36. Dk., SBE , vol. 47,
forty-seven years after he receives the revelation. He bk. 7. 4. 72, p. 66.

spreads righteousness, puts down witchcraft, and
fights wickedness.36 The texts say he possessed the
knowledge of medicine, law, and all kinds of earthly
and heavenly wisdom.37 He visualizes the future of
his religion in a trance.38 He had children by holy
wedlock. Of these three will be miraculously born in
the future as millennial prophets.39 Bratraresh, the
Turanian foe of Zaratusht and his religion, killed him
when he was seventy-seven years of age.40

37. Dk., SBE., vol. 47,
bk. 7. 5. 8, 9, p. 75.
76.
38. BYt. 2. 6-9.
39. Jackson, ib., p. 20,
21. 40. Zsp. 23. 9; Dd.
72. 8; Sd. 9. 5: BYt. 2.
3-5; Dk., SBE., vol. 5.
3. 2; 7. 5.1; 7. 6. 1, p.
73, 74, 77, 126. 165;
Jackson, ib., p. 127129.

[318]
CHAPTER XXXIV
ZOROASTRIANISM AS TAUGHT BY THE PAHLAVI WORKS
Ardashir, a Magus, rejuvenates Zoroastrianism. With the fall of the
Achaeraenian empire were extinguished the last sparks of the fire of racial
jealousy between the Medes and Persians. Common hardships and common
sorrows had obliterated all traces of bitter feeling for one another. The
Seleucid period and the five centuries of Parthian rule, as another great
empire in Iran, served all the more to make them now one compact
homogeneous people, thinking with one mind, feeling with one heart, and
acting with one aim. As already pointed out, the Magi did not receive
recognition in the Avesta. It is not so in the Pahlavi period. The Avestan
term athravan remains during this era as a class designation alone, but
magopat, which later becomes mobad, is used throughout the Pahlavi
literature, equally as a class designation for priesthood and as a personal title
of a priest to distinguish him from a layman. Significant in this light becomes
the fact that although the Persians of old had defeated the Medes and their
sacerdotal caste, the Magi, it was now a Magus again that was destined to
revive the national glory of Iran, and restore their ancient faith. The Kingly
Glory of Iran clave to a hero of the house of Sasan in the province of Fars,1
who was alike priest and king.2 Ardashir was his name, and the Iranian world
rang with the praises of this son of Babak, whose fame is writ large in the
history of Zoroastrianism. 1. Karname-i-Artakhshir-i Papakan, 3. 10-18.
2. Agathias, 2.26. This founder of the Sasanian dynasty won his spurs in. the
battle against Ardavan, the last of the Parthian kings, in a.d. 224. People
turned their eager eyes to him for the national emancipation from the heavy
yoke of the foreigners. His was the task of rebuilding the shattered fragments
of the ancient Persian empire upon the ruins of the Parthian empire. When
he succeeded in [319] consolidating the various states of Iran into one
mighty commonwealth under his sceptre, he proceeded vigorously
thereupon to establish a polity in conformity with the teachings of Zoroaster
which would unite his empire as Church and State. It was through Ardashir
that Zoroastrianism became once more enthroned as the creed paramount,

after a lapse of fully five centuries, and remained so for four centuries under
the House of Sasan. The king himself, being of sacerdotal caste, strongly
upheld the doctrine of the unity of the Church and the State. The two, he
said, are like brother and sister; neither can flourish without the other.3 They
both are interwoven together like two pieces of brocade.4 The Denkard,
which is the greatest of the Pahlavi works of this period, upholds the divine
right of kings and states if the temporal power of the glorious king Jamshed
had been blended with the spiritual power of the supreme priest Zoroaster,
the Evil Spirit would have lain low long ere this, and the Kingdom of
Righteousness would have been established on earth once and forever.5 Both
of these powers will be concentrated in the final saviour, who is to enable
man to gain the final victory over the Kingdom of Wickedness.6 3. Masudi,
tr. Barbier de Meynard, 2. 162.
4. ShN. 6.286.
5. Dk., vol. 3, p. 175, 176.
6. Ib., p. 176. Ardeshir, as a pontiff-king himself, commissioned his highpriest Tansar to collect the scattered Avestan works and thus to prepare an
authorized compilation of the sacred texts.7 The enthusiasm evoked among
the faithful at the restoration of their lost scriptures presents a situation
seldom paralleled in history, and certainly never surpassed in the religious
development of Zoroastrianism.
7. Ib., vol. 9, p. 578. The revival of Zoroastrianism continues with
unabating zeal. The great work inaugurated by the first of the royal House
of Sasan was zealously continued by descendants and notably by Shapur II,8
who brought the work to completion with the help of his illustrious Dastur
and premier Adarbad Mahraspand.9 Mani's heresy was at its height during
this period, and Adarbad strove hard to restore the faith of his people that
was undermined by the misguided leader's heretical teachings. In order to
prove the marvels of the faith, Adarbad is reported to have submitted himself
to the ordeal of the molten metal and to have [320] come out unscathed.10
King Shapur thereupon declared the work, as thus redacted, to be
authoritative, and he commanded that anything outside this canonical

collection should not be countenanced. Another source states that still
further steps were taken to put the truth of the religion to the test. Several
pious mobads were convoked to attend at the temple of the fire Froba, and
there to consider the momentous question of deputing one of their number
to visit, in a vision, the spiritual world and thus to bring back from the angels
themselves a first-hand knowledge of matters spiritual for the complete
restoration of the religion. Seven holy men were first elected from the
assembly. Out of this number Arda Viraf was selected as the most righteous
and saintly. After preliminary ceremonies this holy man entered into a trance
for seven days and nights, during which he was transported in spirit to the
other world. His soul ascended into the realm of heaven, traversed the
spiritual regions, and after beholding paradise visited likewise the inferno.
Viraf described the experience of his visions and thus contributed to
rehabilitating the faith of the people in their historic religion.
8. A.D. 309-379.
9. Dk., vol. 9, p. 579.
10. SLS. 15. 16; Sg. 10. 70; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 5. 5, p. 74, 75; AV. 1.
16. The Pahlavi works are written by many hands in successive periods.
Though the canon was declared closed by the edict of Shapur II, the work of
rendering the Avestan texts into Pahlavi with exegetic commentaries, and the
composition of original works in the court language, continued throughout
the Sasanian period, and even long after the downfall of the empire. Few if
any of the exegetical works of Zoroastrianism written during the Sasanian
period have survived the devastating hands of the conquering hordes of the
Arabs, and almost all the important Pahlavi works that we possess today were
written under the Abbasid Caliphs. The Persians in whose veins flowed the
kingly blue blood had helped the Abbasids in overthrowing the Umayyads,
thus avenging themselves upon their national foes, the Arabs. This greatly
elevated the position of the Zoroastrians at the royal court of Bagdad.
During this period it was that the composition of the Pahlavi treatises was
undertaken with renewed vigour. To the ninth century we owe much of the
Pahlavi literature that has come down to us. Thus the Pahlavi literature
covers a period of about seven centuries, beginning [321] from the first

Sasanian ruler, Ardashir, or still earlier, and stretching downwards to the
times of the illustrious Caliph of the Abbasid dynasty, al-Ma'mun, or even
later. The invention of the modern Persian alphabet restricted the use of
Pahlavi to the learned clerics, who continued to make some slight additions
to the Pahlavi literature up to the end of the eleventh century.11
11. West, Pahlavi Literature, in GIrPh. 2. 80. The Pahlavi literature has its
roots in the Avestan soil. The Pahlavi works allege that the Avestan Nasks
had perished, but the tradition transmitted orally from father to son and the
fragments of the sacred texts did not suffer the Avestan lore to die out
entirely. The extant Pahlavi works contain quotations from Avestan works
that have not come down to us, and this may help to show that the later
writers either quoted from memory or that they had access to Avestan works,
since lost, when they wrote their Pahlavi treatises; or possibly it may serve to
prove both facts. Nay, some of the Pahlavi works seem to be wholly or in
part reproductions of some of the Avesta Nasks, and most scholars agree
with West that the Pahlavi Bundahishn is an epitome of the Avestan Damdad
Nask, that has since disappeared.12 This leads to the probable conclusion
that besides the two archetype copies deposited in the royal treasuries at
Persepolis and Samarkand, there may have existed other copies of these
Nasks, in full or in part, in private possession or in the more notable firetemples. The internal evidence of some of the most important Pahlavi works
show us that they preserve much of the material derived from Avestan
sources, which still existed in their days, but has been subsequently lost, and
thus make up for the loss of the original Avestan books to a considerable extent.
12. SBE., vol. 5. int. xxiv. The Pahlavi literature is the completion of the
Avestan works. The Pahlavi works explain, elaborate, and describe in detail
much of what is stated in brief in the original Avestan texts. This is the
inestimable value of the Pahlavi literature. A few examples may serve to
illustrate this statement. The Avestan texts frequently mention 'the Time of
Long Duration,' a period carved out from eternity as the age for the duration
of the present world, but give no idea, as far as the texts have been
preserved, as to the length of this mighty aeon. It is to [322] the Pahlavi
books that we have to turn to ascertain the specific duration of this period,

for the millennial doctrine is recognized but not described in the Avestan
writings that we possess today. It is worked out in full detail in the Pahlavi
works. This fact might even suggest that the idea originated with the
Pahlavists but such is not the case, for we know from Plutarch that
Theopompus, who flourished in the fourth century B.C., or a little before the
close of the Avestan period, was well acquainted with this doctrine of the
Zoroastrians, and wrote about it in his works.13 13. Is. et Os. 47. The Later
Avestan texts speak of the future judgment, the rising of the dead, the
renovation, but it is the Pahlavi works that acquaint us with the method of
the administration of justice in the heavenly tribunal and the final restoration
of the universe.
The texts of the Younger Avesta, as noted above, speak of different heavens
and hells, but the Pahlavi works locate them, and give a detailed description
of the area they cover, the boundaries that divide them from one another,
and the conditions that prevail in them.
The trend of the religious thought of the Pahlavi period. We have
described the change from the Gathic to the Avestan texts as a retrograde
step; the Pahlavi texts are still farther removed from the Gathas. The Gathic
ideal lingers and continues to be admired, but it has ceased to influence. It
evokes praise from the Pahlavi writers, but fails to inspire them with its
abstract tone. Zoroaster is a historical personage in the Gathas. In the Later
Avesta he becomes super-human; but in the Pahlavi works his personality is
enshrouded by miracles, and he is transformed into a myth. The fascination
for marvels in religion is an unmistakable sign of the times. Christian
bishops, who, as we shall see in the further stage of our inquiry, carried on
inveterate disputes with the Zoroastrian clergy in Persia, based the claim of
the greatness of their own religion on miracles. Perhaps in consequence the
life-story of Zoroaster, as told by the writers of the Pahlavi period, is
similarly stamped with the mark of the miraculous. The Gathas and the
Younger Avesta speak of the prophet's conferences with the Amshaspands,
or archangels, and his communing with them. The Pahlavi texts, as we have
seen, state [323]that they came to the court of King Gushtasp as the envoys
of Ormazd, to give proof of the divine calling of the prophet. Moreover,
when Zoroaster met Vohuman, he actually saw the body and the face of the
archangel, his size, and his garments, and in these celestial conferences with

the archangels the prophet was requested by each in turn to command
mankind to take due care of the concrete thing under the special charge of
each as an Amshaspand and not the abstract virtue that each impersonates.
Vohuman, for instance, as the genius of good mind, did not emphasize the
faithful adherence to good thoughts, but contented himself with reminding
the prophet to teach mankind to take care of the cattle. Artavahisht, the
genius of righteousness, gave no command to Zaratusht to exhort men to
follow the path of righteousness, but taught him that the best way of
propitiating the heavenly spirit was to propitiate his fire. Similarly the other
archangels in these celestial interviews did not hold up as the ideals the
virtues over which they presided, but they inculcated due preservation of
their respective earthly objects. A Pazend penitential prayer, whose
authorship is attributed to Dastur Adarbad Mahraspand, the high-priest and
premier of King Shapur (309-379 a.d.), mentions the Amshaspands by name,
and exhorts the penitent to atone severally for the sins committed against
them. In every case he addresses each archangel in turn and craves
forgiveness for any offence that may have been committed by ill-treating the
earthly object over which the genius presides. Offences against the abstract
virtues which the archangels impersonate are not meniiored in this treatise,14
and this fact tends decidedly to show that phase of Zoroastrianism in which
abstract ideas were gradually losing in importance, and the concrete side of
the religion was coming out with greater prominence. 14. Pt. 8. This process
of materializing the original abstract concepts reaches its climax in the
eschatological notions of this period. The several heavens and hells, as also
the bridge of judgment that leads to them, are now completely materialized.
All the splendours of a royal court with its golden thrones, rich carpets, fine
cushions are transferred to paradise. On the other hand, all sorts of physical
tortures that man's ingenuity can devise prevail in hell. [324] Fifteen hundred
years separated Zoroaster from the Sasanian period, and a thick veil began to
hide the pristine truth of his great religion from his followers.
The Sasanian Church became an arbiter of the faith of Zoroaster. It was
through the Church that the religious teachings filtered into the populace.
During the period of her great influence, when the State was practically
under her tutelage, the Church rendered a lasting service by her attempts to
reinvigorate the Mazdayasnian faith. She triumphed when she stood for the
spirit of the religion of Mazda; but she failed when she descended to rigid

formalism, stifled independent inquiry, stigmatized honest doubt as
Ahrimanian, and sought to overrule original thinking by dogmatic assertions.
Religion defeats its own ends when it degenerates into dogmatic theology.
And it was not otherwise in Persia.
[325]
CHAPTER XXXV
THE ACTIVE PROPAGANDA OF THE FAITH
The Pahlavi works on proselytism. Zaratusht first preached his new religion
to the people of Iran where he was born; but Ormazd has commanded that
the excellent religion should be spread among all races of mankind
throughout the world.1 In their commentary on the oft-recurring Avestan
formula fravarâne, the Pahlavi versionists add an explanatory gloss that every
believer undertakes to proclaim the Zoroastrian religion of Ormazd to the
entire world. It is said that the act of the highest merit that a non-believer
can perform in his life is to his religion and embrace the Mazdayasnian
faith.2 The great Sasanian monarch, Shapur II, zealously worked for the
restoration and promulgation of the faith among the unbelievers with the aid
of his illustrious Dastur Adarbad.3 The Denkard sanctions even the use of
force for the conversion of the aliens.4 A Pahlavi treatise devoted mostly to
the Zoroastrian rituals attests the practice of admitting outsiders into the
Zoroastrian fold.5 Another Pahlavi tractate treating of the social and legal
practices of the Sasanians lays down that if a Christian slave embraces the
faith of his Zoroastrian master, he should be given freedom.
1. Dk., vol. 10, bk. 5. 14, p. 12; see Gray, Missions (Zoroastrian) in , ERE. 8.
749-751.
2. SBE., vol. 18, Appendix, p. 415.
3. Dk., vol. 9, p. 579.
4. SBE., vol. 37, bk. 8. 26. p. 88, 89.

5. Aerpat. bk. 1. 4. 28, 29; 1. 5. 4.
6. Mâdigân-i Hazâr Dâdistân, ed. Modi, p. 1, Poona. 1901. An Armenian
account of the Zoroastrian propaganda. Elisaeus, bishop of the Amadunians
in the fifth century A.D., in his historical work states that King Yazdagard II
and his royal court resorted to both persuasion and force in their attempt to
win over the Christians of Armenia to Zoroastrianism.7 The [326] Christian
subjects of the Persian king in Armenia, we are informed, were promised
high positions, court distinctions, royal favours, and the remission of the
taxes, if they accepted the national faith of Iran. Mihr Narsih, the premier of
Yazdagard II (A.D. 438-457), in the proclamation to the Christian
population in Armenia that he issued at the royal command, exhorts them to
adopt the religion that their sovereign holds, and adds that those that do not
acknowledge the Mazdayasnian faith are deaf and blind, and are misled by
Ahriman.8 Elisaeus informs us that this proselytizing movement on the part
of the Magi of Sasanian times was not confined to Armenia alone, but it
extended further to Georgia, Albania, and various other countries.9
7. The History of Vartan, p. 8, 9, 11, 31, 32, 35, London, 1830. 8. The History of
Vartan, p. 11,12.
9. Ib., p. 26. Judaism and Christianity penetrate into Persia as the
formidable rivals of the national faith. When the Zoroastrian Church was
thus engaged in promulgating the faith of Zoroaster outside Persia, her
religious supremacy was challenged at home by Judaism, and more
aggressively by Christianity.10 Ardashir had established Zoroastrianism as the
state religion of Persia, but there were in the empire colonies of people
following other religions. Iran had long ceased to be a religious unit, and the
vast number of Jews, Christians, and others of divergent faiths and creeds
contributed towards disunion. Referring to the presence of the people
professing different religions in his kingdom, King Hormizd IV once
remarked that his throne rested on four feet;11 and troublesome these outside
elements certainly proved to the sovereign occupying the throne. A fairly
tolerable latitude was conceded to these adherepts of the alien faiths, though
occasional persecutions of them were not unknown. These non-Zoroastrians
frequently occasioned heated polemics in which virulant criticism and

derisive terms were exchanged between the the Zoroastrian priests on the
one side and the prelates of the rival faiths on the other. Iranian society was
often convulsed with the storm of controversy. The alien faiths were branded
as the promptings of the Evil Spirit, and were declared to be teaching a vile
law, [327] opposed to the pure law of Mazda.12 The religions that most
struggled in this manner with the national faith during the Sasanian period
were Judaism and Christianity, whose position in Persia we shall now discuss.
10. See Gray, Jews in Zoroastrianism in ERE., 7 562, 563; Jesus Christ in
Zoroastrianism, 7. 552, 553; Pettazoni, La Religione di Zarathustra, p. 193-199;
201-204.
11. Tabari, tr. Nöldeke, p. 268; Wigram, History of the Assyrian Church, p. 214.
London, 1910.
12. SLS. 6. 7. Judaism in Persia. Judea had come under the Persian rule at
the very early period. The Babylonian exile brought the Jews into close
touch with the Persians in the sixth century B.C. We have already referred to
the fact that the restoration of tbe temple at Jerusalem was executed at the
royal command of the Persian kings Cyrus and Darius. The Jews had settled
in Persia in large numbers from very early times, and had planted their
colonies all over the country. They thrived peacefully and were given
privileges to manage their own civic affairs without molestation from the
state. Some of the members of the royal house had even married Jewish
princesses. King Yazdagard I, for example, had a Jewish consort.13 But in
general those who contracted matrimonial alliances with Jewish women were
disliked, and the Denkard inveighs in strong terms against the practice of
contracting such unions.14 In the course of time, the Persians and the
Israelites seem to have been sharply divided in religious matters.
Disputations on questions of belief must have been frequent. All of the
Pahlavi works denounce Judaism in unsparing terms. The writer of the
Denkard, for instance, avers that Judaism is not a divine religion,15 and points
to Zohak, the most detested of men, as the originator of the Jewish
scriptures,16 branding elsewhere the Jewish books as utterances of the
demons.17 Seno, a Zoroastrian sage, is reported to have said, in his
admonitions to the kings of Persia, that the sovereign of the people ought to

keep aloof from the religion of the Jews, as bringing devastation to the
world.18 The progress of the Jewish belief be arrested, lest it spread its evil
among the faithful.19 The knowledge of this religion produces baneful
influences upon the Mazdayasnians,20 it implants vice,21 and [328] aggravates
immorality.22 Men become of evil disposition through it.23 Those who
belong to this faith cannot be said to be related to the Prime Source.24 Such
violent attacks on the beliefs of a race which had settled in Persia from the
very early period of her history show us the bitterness of feeling that must
have prevailed between Zoroastrians and Jews. A later writer, confounding
Kai Lohrasp with Nebuchadnezzar, states that one of the meritorious deeds
done by Lohrasp was that he destroyed Jerusalem and scattered the Jews.25
13. Shatroihâ-i Airân, 47, 53.
14. Dk., vol. 2, p. 97-102.
15. Dk., vol. 4, p. 211.
16. Dk., vol. 6, p. 372, 373; vol. 7, p. 439.
17. Dk., vol. 9, p. 604.
18. Dk., vol. 5, p. 310.
19. Dk., vol. 1, p. 24.
20. Dk., vol. 6, p. 373.
21. Dk., vol. 7, p. 456.
22. Dk., vol. 6, p. 357, 358.
23. Dk., vol. 4, p. 257.
24. Dk., vol. 4, p. 267.

25. Mkh. 27. 64, 67; see also Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 209. Christian propaganda
in Iran. Christianity had entered Persia during the Parthian period, and the
Sasanians found the creed of Christ more or less current when they
established their empire. Of all the alien faiths in Persia, Christianity was the
most aggressive. The pertinacious attempt of the Christians to win over
converts to their faith from the ruling nation, often caused shedding of
human blood. There was a state of perennial war between Sasanian Persia
and Byzantine Rome, which had embraced Christianity. The sympathy of
the Christian population naturally went to their Roman co-religionists and
caused disturbances in Persia. Moreover, the fanatic zeal of the priests on
both sides fomented communal strife, which often resulted in the destruction
of the Zoroastrian fire-temples and Christian churches, and the consequent
persecution of the Christians. Great as are the resemblances between the
fundamental teachings of the two religions, their ethical systems show a
glaring distinction. Christianity exalted monastic virtues, and glorified
celibacy. The Zoroastrian priests vehemently denounced the foreign priests
who preached a mode of life which clashed with their ethics.26 Reckless
utterances of the Christian priests often aggravated the ill-feeling between
the two peoples, and violent scenes ensued. An enthusiastic bishop once
regaled his congregation by saying that the soul of the king would, in his
future life, be born in hell-fire with Satan, whereas the Christians would be
translated to heaven,27 while another patriarch urged the Roman bishops to
free them from the accursed rule of the [329] Persians.28 The priests on both
the sides became zealots, and occasionally fell into the slough of fanaticism.
Great was the fury of religious rancour that prevailed on such occasions. The
seceders from Zoroastrianism were persecuted; apostasy was made a capital
crime by the Zoroastrian Church, and the renegades were put to death.
Notwithstanding such harsh measures adopted by the Iranian clergy,
numerous converts were made throughout the whole time of the Sasanian
rule from Zoroastrianism to Christianity. Some of the greatest saints were
won from the Zoroastrian community. A noted Zoroastrian preceptor
embraced Christianity, and later became the Patriarch under the name Mar
Aba the Great. The Zoroastrian priesthood clamoured for his death, and the
law of the country supported them. It was the great admiration that King
Noshirvan held for the Patriarch that saved his life.29 Yazdagard I and
Hormizd IV ascended the throne with proclivities for Christianity, and

Noshirvan and Khusru Parviz had wedded Christian princesses. Nushzad,
one of the sons of the great Sasanian king Noshirvan, was brought up a
Christian.30o Another ruler of the House of Sasan, Parviz, built a monastery
to please his favourite Christian wife.31 Such royal examples encouraged the
Christian propaganda in Iran. Yazdagard I, who favoured the Christian
cause, was hailed by the Christians as the blessed king, but was branded by
his own co-religionists as the wicked sinner.32
26. Wigram, op. cit., p. 64; Elisaeus. op. cit. p. 13.
27. Wigram, op. cit., p. 43.
28. Ib., p. 151, 152.
29. Wigram, op. cit., p. 184, 22-209.
30. Tabari, tr. Nöldeke, p. 467-474.
31. Wigram, op. cit., p. 259.
32. Shatroihâ-i-Airân, 26; cf. Wigram, op. cit., p. 85, 86. [330]
CHAPTER XXXVI
SECTS
Zoroastrianism split up into a number of sects. As indicated above, the
Zoroastrian church had lost all control over its adherents. Sect after sect
arose, each claiming to interpret the religion of Zoroaster in its own light.1
The fact that numerous sects flourished in Iran at this period is proved by the
frequent allusions to them by Greek, Arabian, Syriac, and Armenian writers.
Shahrastani, as we shall see later, speaks of three sects, namely the
Zarvanites, the Gayomarthians, and the Zardushtians. Mohsan Fani refers to
fourteen sects as he witnessed in his days in the seventeenth century. Several
of these, he adds, flourished from early times. Unfortunately the accounts of
those sects, which we find in the extant Zoroastrian literature, is very
meagre. Several of them, about which we get some information from the

non-Zoroastrian sources, are not even mentioned by name in the Iranian
works. The Armenian writers, Eznik and Elisaeus, writing in the fifth century
about the Zoroastrians of their own time, state they were split into two rival
sects called Mog and Zendik. Damascius (529 A.D.), on the authority of
Eudemus states that sects flourished in Iran which held space as the
primordial being that created the rival spirits of goodness and evil.2 The most
formidable of the sects, which counted eminent persons among its adherents
during the Sasanian period and which had a considerable following long
after the disappearance of this last Zoroastrian empire, was that of the
Zarvanites. Zarvan, or Time, accompanied Mithra in his migration to the far
West and as Kronos was placed at the pinnacle of the divine hierarchy in the
Mithraic cult.3 Antiochus I of Commagene speaks of Boundless Time. 1.
Jackson, Zoroastrian Studies, p. 174-177, Edwards, Sects (Zoroastrian) in ERE. 11.
345-347.
2. De Primis Princ., tr. by Chaignet, Les Premiers Principes, vol. 2, p. 129, Paris,
1898.
3. Cumont, The Mysteries of Mithra, Eng. tr. McConnack, p. 107, Chicago,
1903. [331]
ZARVANITES
Zarvan according to the Pahlavi writers. This image of the eternal duration
of Time is as cold and lifeless in the Pahlavi works as it was in the Avestan
texts. Ormazd created it, and with its creation the entire existence came into
motion.4 or according to another passage, Boundless Time is eternally in
Ormazd, and the very first work of his in creation appertained to Time.5 He
brought into being the earthly and heavenly creatures through his own
splendour and through the blessing of Time.6 Zarvan, or Time, is called
hungerless and thirstless, painless and deathless, ever-living and everpredominating over the fleeting things of the universe.7 Thus the
authoritative Zoroastrian works speak of Boundless Time in its relation to
Ormazd; just as any system of philosophy or theology may speak of the
eternity of God. The demon Arashk is alleged to have said that Ormazd and
Ahriman have been two brothers in one womb.8 Mani calls Zarvan in his
heresy, Time Eternal, the Father God of Light.9

4. Zsp. 1.24.
5. Dk., vol. 6, p. 415, 416.
6. Mkh. 8.8.
7. Mkh. 8.9.
8. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 30.4, p. 241, 242.
9. Jackson, Researches in Manichaeism, p. 8. Zarvan according to the nonZoroastrian writers. The account that we get of this being from the writings
of the classical and Armenian authors is different from what we find in
Iranian sources.10 The Armenian and Syrian writers attack Zoroastrianism on
this point.11 Zarvan, or Time, they aver, is held by the Persians to be the
generative principle of the universe. Moses of Chorene12 writes that the
Zoroastrians regarded Time as the source and father of existence.13
According to Photius this being was looked upon as the ruler of the universe;
he offered sacrifice in order to beget Hormizdas, but gave birth Hormizdas
and Satan.14 Damascius quotes Eudemus (about [332] 306 B.C.) as stating
that Time is the father of Oromasdes or Light and Arimanius or Darkness.15
10. See Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 274-278; Gray, Zrvam, in The Foundations of the
Iranian Religions, p. 124-129; Junker (tr. Tavadia), The idea of Zruvan in the Iranian
Literature and its influence elsewhere in Journal of the Cama Oriental Institute, 5. 1-10;
Pettazoni, La Riligione di Zarathustra, p. 189, 190.
11. Nöldeke, Fesgtruss on Roth, p. 34-38, Stuttgart, 1893; Blue, The Zarvanite
System in Indo-Iranian Studies in honour of Dastur D. P. Sanjana, 68, London, 1925.
12. Blue, ib., p. 68, 69.
13. Cf. Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 275.
14. Theodore of Mopsuestia, apud Photius, Bibl. 81.

15. See Fox and Pemberton, Passages in Creek and Latin Literature relating to
Zoroaster and Zoroastrianism, p. 107. The Armenian writer Eznik, in the fifth
century a.d., attests the existence of a sect that held Zrovan or Time as the
sovereign lord and was named after it. The sect, he says, holds Zrovan as the
generative principle of everything, and it was from this primordial principle
that both Ormizd and Arhmn have sprung. They are its twin children.16 The
Armenian historians credit Mihr Narsih, the premier of Yazdagard TI, with
speaking of Zarvan as the prime originator of Ohrmazd and Ahriman.17 According to the teachings of this sect, as portrayed by these writers Zarvan
existed when the earth was not, and the heaven was not, and brooded over
the thought of begetting a son who would create the universe. A doubt
crossed his mind, the account claims, at the end of a thousand years, lest his
sacrifice should turn out fruitless and he would not be blessed with a child.
The sacrifice, however, turned out fruitful, but not without mishap. Zarvan
conceived two offspring, one as the result of his sacrifice, the other as the
outcome of the doubt that had desecrated his mind. He resolved to give
sovereignty to him who was born first. Ohrmazd, who seems to have been
possessed of fore-knowledge even before he was thus born, read the thought
of his father Zarvan, and gave it out to his comrade in the embryo. Ahriman
thereupon perforated the womb and came into existence before Ohrmazd.
He demanded sovereignty from his begetter, Zarvan, who disowned this
ugly, dark creature, and gave the sceptre into the hands of Ohrmazd, who
was resplendent with light. Ahriman now charged his father with breaking
his vow. In order to free himself from this accusation, Zarvan entered into a
covenant with Ahriman, and decreed that the empire of the universe should
be conjointly ceded to both Ohrmazd and Ahriman for nine thousand years,
though the right of priority was ever to be with the Good Spirit. After the
expiration of this period, Ohrmazd, it was destined, should be at liberty to
deal with his wicked brother as he liked.18
16 Blue, ib , p. 70, 71.
17 Elisaeus, The History of Vartan, p. 11, 12.
18 Cf. Eznik, translated in Wilson's The Parsi Religion, p. 542, 543, Bombay,
1843; Elisaeus, The History of Vartan, p. 11, 12. [333] This fantastic legend has

left no traces whatever in the extant Pahlavi works. They do not even
mention any sect which had. its designation after Time itself, and we fail to
glean any connected account of the doctrines of the Zarvanites from the extant Pahlavi works. Be this as it may, it is certain that a sect of the Zarvanites,
who evidently aimed at resolving the Zoroastrian dualism into monotheism
by the apotheosis of Time, did. flourish for a long time in Iran. Shahristani,
who wrote in the early part of the twelfth century, attests, as we shall see
later,, that he met the followers of this sect in his day.
FATALISTS
Superstitious belief in Fate that weaves the web of events in man's life.
God has willed man to be the architect of his destiny and endowed him with
the freedom of will, says Zarathushtra.19 Man's ignorance and superstition
have led him to the belief that he is not a free agent who can control and
shape the actions of his life. Human happenings, it is believed, are regulated
by the position and movements of the stars and planets and constellations.
Ingenious brains have laboured to divine the future from the careful
observation of the movements of the heavenly bodies. They have practised
augury by watching the flight of birds and have drawn omens from the stars
and other sources. They have endeavoured to read the course of the stars and
to study with utmost scrupulous care and anxiety, worthy of more rational
and useful pursuits, the phenomena, in the vain hope that they would
thereby be able to foretell coming events and forestall coming misfortunes.
Fate, they have taught,, dogs man's footsteps and overtakes him unawares. It
hunts. him like wild animals to and fro. Nothing could be done against it. In
vain would a man struggle to save himself from being drowned in the floods
of fate. The mightiest among men has to yield submission to the decrees of
unrelenting fate. This credulous belief in the inevitability of the decrees of
Fate has led men and women to accept with fatalistic resignation what befell
their lot. It has led them to submit and succumb to the buffetings of life
where they should have braved them and fought [334] them and
overpowered them. The belief in Fate and Kismet and Karma have all been
equally paralysing. In one case it is the movements of the stars, in other the
arbitrary will of Providence and in the third, actions of past life, that grip the
individual at every step he takes in his life. Anything and everything that
happens is predestined either by the stars and planets or by the inscrutable

decree of Kismet or by the inexorable law of Karma. The fatalistic belief has
crippled the activities, cramped the progress, stifled the spirit, and blighted
the ardour of countless millions of people in the East. 19. See Jackson. The
Zoroastrian Doctrine of the Freedom of the Will in Zoroastrian Studies, 219-244.
Mithraism is loaded with fatalistic ideas which it received from Babylonia
before going to Europe. Orthodox Zoroastrianism did not entirely escape
the Babylonian influence. The Babylonian and Magian diviners played
important part in the lives of the people. Shah Namah abounds in instances
of superstitious regard for omens and portents and astrological auguries. The
court astrologers read the stars to indicate the future events. The kings did
not embark upon war without consulting the diviners. According to the
Pahlavi Aiyadgar-i Zariran, King Vishtasp asks his wise diviner, Jamasp, to
foretell the consequences of the war.20 When Xerxes was marching against
the Greeks, an eclipse of the sun took place. The king was taken with alarm
and consulted the magicians about the meaning of the portent.21 Men and
women regulated the chief events of their daily lives according to the
dictates of the planetary movements. Fate generally became the ruling force
of life.
20. 35-39.
21. Herod. 7. 37. Fate is the decree of Time. Time and Fate are indissolubly
linked together. They are often spoken of as identical with each other.22 The
movements of the heavens regulate Fate, and the planets and constellations
are the arbiters of man's fortune.23 The good and evil stars determine man's
lot, which is linked with the course of the stars. Every good and evil event
that falls to the lot of man comes to pass through the doings of the twelve
constellations that are ranged on the side of Ohrmazd, or through the
baneful influence of the seven planets, as their special antagonists, arrayed on
Ahriman's side. Both of these agents combine to administer the affairs of the
world.24 22. Theodore of Mopsuestia, apud Photius, Bibl. 81.
23. See Gray, Fate (Iranian) in ERE. 5. 792,793.
24. Mkh. 8.17-19, 21. [335] Ohrmazd allots happiness to man. If man does
not receive it, it is owing to the extortion of these planets.25 Like brigands

and highwaymen they rob the righteous of their good lot and bestow it upon
the wicked.26 Ahriman has specially created them for the purpose of
depriving man of the happiness which the good stars would bestow upon
man.27 Like witches they rush upon the creation to spread evil,28 and pervert
every creature that comes across their path.29 Fate, as the guardian of the
celestial sphere, is therefore implored to help mankind at all times and in
every deed.30 That which is ordained to come to pass will unfailingly happen;
man should not worry over things over which he has no control. He should
learn to receive with tranquillity and calm whatever falls to his lot.31 Though
nothing in the world can rescind the inexorable decree of Fate,32 divine
Providence, moved by the prayers and supplications of mortals, can still, in
special cases, intervene in mortal behalf. Owing to the counter-movements
of the evil planets, Providence rarely interferes.33
25 Mkh. 38. 4, 5.
26 Sg. 4.24-27.
27 Mkh. 12. 7-9.
28 Sg. 4. 9.
29 Mkh. 8. 20.
30 SLS. 22. 31.
31 SLS. 20. 13; Mkh. 27. 11.
32 SLS. 20. 17; Dk. vol. 12, bk. 6. A. 6, p. 36, 37.
33 Mkh. 24. 3-8. The inscrutable power of Fate. Among the masses
humility is apt to degenerate into servility in human affairs, or into fatalism
in their relations with the superhuman powers. In Persia, the dissolution of
the great empire, and the centuries of struggle and servitude that followed
the national catastrophe, drove the Iranians to believe in Fate, the inevitable
necessity before which they had to bow. The fatalist doctrine pervades the

writings of the Pahlavi period. As early as the fifth century the Armenian
controversialist Eznik attacks this fatalistic doctrine of the Persians.34 Fate,
we are told, is written on man's forehead; he is fettered to it from his very
birth.35 Man is ignorant of the course mapped out for him by Fate, which
guides the affairs of the world.36 Fate holds sovereign sway over every one
and everything.37 Vazurgmitra states that the world shows that fools prosper
and the wise suffer, for which reason he upholds [336] the view that the
ordering of results of man's actions is not in man's hands, but rests with
Fate.38 34. Eznik, Against the Sects, German tr. Schmid,2. 15, Vienna, 1900.
S5 Mkh. 24. 6.
36. Mkh. 27. 10.
37. Mkh. 47. 7. 38 Ibn Isfandiyar, History of Tabaristan, tr. Browne, p. 85, 86,
London, 1905. Under the influence of Fate the wise man fails of his wisdom,
and the fool shows intelligence, the hero becomes a coward, and the coward
plays the part of a hero, the industrious turn out to be indolent, and the
indolent become industrious.39 When Fate befriends an indolent, ignorant,
arid wicked man, his sloth becomes like unto diligence, his ignorance unto
knowledge, and his wickedness unto righteousness. On the other hand,
when Fate frowns upon a wise man and a good man, his wisdom is
transformed to foolishness and ignorance, and his knowledge, skill, and
worthiness do not help him in the least.40 Life, wife, and child, power or
fortune alike, come all through Fate.41
39. Mkh. 23. 5-7.
40.Mkh. 51.5-7.
41. Dd. 71. 3; Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. D. 1, p. 75; Jamaspi, p. 122. How far Fate
affects man's exertions. Replying to the query whether man gets various
things through Fate or through his own exertion, Vazurgmitra, the talented
premier of Noshirvan, states that both of these are as closely linked together
as are man's body and life. As the body falls a ruined tabernacle of clay when
life has quitted it, and as life without the body is an intangible wind, so are

Fate and exertion indissolubly united with each other.42 Fate is the efficient
cause, and exertion is the means through which man attains everything.43 It
is true that exertion is of no avail when Fate has ordained otherwise. Man
may toil, and yet may not reap the fruit of his labour. But then, man's
exertion in good works, even if not rewarded with fruitful results in this
world, will reap a benefit in the next world through the angels. Man,
therefore, has to depend upon the doings of Fate for the good of this world,
but upon his own actions for the spiritual goods to be enjoyed in the world
hereafter.44 42. Gs. 56.
43. Gs. 57.
44. Phl. Vd. 5. 8; Mkh. 22. 4-6. Through Fate man performs meritorious
deeds.45 Man, it is true, is dependent upon the decree of Fate as regards his
earthly possessions, but it is left only to his individual exertion whether [337]
he shall reap the reward of righteousness or the retribution of wickedness.46
Tansar, in his letter to Jasnaf, the king of Tabaristan, writes that it is wrong
to deny the sovereign sway of Fate over man's life, but it is equally wrong to
give up personal effort under the exaggerated: idea of the influence of Fate.
The wise, he continues, should take the middle course, for Fate and man's
free will are like two loads on the back of an animal. If either is heavier than
the other, both fall down.47 45. Dk., vol. 9, p. 585.
46. Dd. 71. 3.
47. Darmesteter, Lettre de Tansar au roi de Tabaristan, in JA., 1894, 1. p. 553.
Despite such prominence given to the workings of Fate by the Pahlavi
writers, fatalism never came to be employed among the Zoroastrians as an
excuse for cloaking man's indolence. It is idle persons, we are told, that
blame Fate.48 The feeble and faltering always throw the burden of their faults
on Fate. The ever active spirit of Zoroastrianism militated against fatalism,
and saved the people from much of its baneful influences.
48. AnAtM. I 19. [338]
CHAPTER XXXVII

HERESIES
Heretics detested more than the demon-worshippers. Heresy was one of
the greatest crimes of which a Zoroastrian could be guilty according to the
ancient texts. It was a criminal! offense punishable by law. The severity of
the law, however, was considerably modified during the Sasanian period,
even though the works written during this period do not show any
considerable advance in real religious toleration. In his letter to the king of
Tabaristan, Tansar states that, in the statutes which Ardashir had framed, he
had greatly modified the rigour of the law; for, whereas formerly a heretic
was instantly killed, Tansar's royal master had ordered that such a sinner
should be imprisoned for one year, and that the religion of Ohrmazd should
be preached to him daily during that period in order to reclaim him from
heresy. If he still persisted obstinately in his heretical belief, capital
punishment was to be inflicted upon him as a last resort.1 King Noshirvan
extirpated heresies when he came to the throne.2 Any one also who did not
give assent to the dogmatic teachings of the Zoroastrian creed, or
expounded views that were at variance with those sanctioned by her
authority, incurred the odium of heresy, and came under the ban of
ecclesiastical excommunication. The Church forbade with proscription any
criticism of its authoritative canon; the ecclesiastical doctrine was fixed, and
to think otherwise was heresy. Giving the definition of a heretic, the
Denkard states that whosoever teaches, speaks, or acts respecting the beliefs
and practices of the national faith differently from that which the ancients
have done is a heretic.3 Heretics are of three kinds: the deceiver, deceived,
and the opinionated.4 All of these misrepresent the teachings of the elders,
and pervert [339] the sacred writings,5 as they declaim against the
established teachings.6 They promote, in opposition to Ohrmazd, the
wicked religion of Ahriman.7 The, heretic is possessed by the Evil Spirit.8 He
is the disciple of the demon of heresy.9 The demons lodge in his body;10 he
is, in fact, a demon in human form.11 Even during his lifetime, his body
resembles a corpse and the faithful should refrain from coming in contact
with him, lest they themselves become defiled.12 Bad as is his lot in this
world, it is worse in the world to come. His soul is doomed to everlasting
torture. It becomes a darting snake, and there is no resurrection for it.13 For
these reasons, men are warned to guard themselves from anything that
savours of heresy.14 The Pahlavi writers, in every treatise, are unsparing in

their denunciation of heretics, arraigning them for deception, lying, and
perversion. The heretic Gurgi is called a disreputable impostor, full of
avarice, and worthy of every opprobrium.15 In a similar manner, the Pahlavi
works swarm with invectives against Mani, an arch-heretic in the third
century A.D., to whose account we now turn.
1. Darmesteter, Lettre de Tansar au roi de Tabaristan, in JA., 1894, p. 524.
2. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 4. 28, p. 415.
3. Vol. 12, bk. 6. C. 26, p. 58.
4. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. C. 83, p. 74.
5. Dk., vol. l,p. 3.
6. Dk., vol. l,p. 5.
7. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 53. 2, p. 328.
8. Dk., vol. 7, p. 474.
9. Phl. Ys. 44. 14.
10. Phl. Ys. 47,4.
11. Dk.,vol. 1, p. 15.
12. Dk., vol. 1, p. 31.
13. Sls. 17. 7.
14. Dk., vol. ll. bk. 6. 128, p. 35.
15. Dk., vol. 5. p. 320.
MANI

The arch-heretic of the Sasanian period. This remarkable man was born in
the reign of Ardavan, the last of the Parthian kings.16 He received his first
revelation at the age of thirteen, and ultimately claimed to be a prophet, the
very seal or the last messenger of God.17 He began his propaganda under
Ardashir, but worked with greater vigour under Shapur I, who embraced his
faith.18 Manichaeism flourished with varied success [340] side by side with
the state religion until the time when Bahram I ascended the throne. The
teachings of Mani acquired a strong hold over the minds of many, and
threatened to be a powerful rival of the ancient faith. The national spirit
rebelled against the encroachment of the new cult, and the king strove to
extinguish the heresy by the exercise of a firm hand. He confronted Mani
with his Dastur, who threw him a challenge that, both of them should pour
molten lead on their bellies, and whosoever came out unhurt should be
declared to be in the right. This Mani did not accept. Consequently in A.D.
276-277 he was flayed to death and his body was stuffed with straw.19 With
the removal of Mani from the field of activity, the Manichaean propaganda
entered upon its dissolution in Iran, but the seed of the new faith he had
sown did -not remain unfruitful. Despite the heavy slaughter of the
Manichaeans, the new cult spread from the home of its origin to the Far East,
reaching even as far as China, and penetrated far into the West in the fourth
century, where for some time it contested supremacy with Christianity,
somewhat as Persian Mithraism had done before it. St. Augustine was a
follower of Manichaeism before he was converted to Christianity. He was
not able to free himself from the influence of his teachings even after he had
joined the Christian Church. He imparted its dualistic philosophy to Christian doctrine.20
16. See Jackson's excellent work Researches in Manichaeism, New York, 1932;
Sevan, Manichaeism in ERE. 8. 394-402.
17. Al-Biruni, Chronology of Ancient Nations, tr. Sachau, p. 189, 190. London,
1879; Mirkhond, Rauzat-us Safa, tr. Rehatsek, part 1, vol. 2. p. 336, London,
1892.
18. Mirkhond, p. 333, 336; al-Ya'qubi, quoted by Browne, Literary History of
Persia, 1. 156, New York, 1902.

19. Al-Biruni, p. 191; al-Ya'qubi, cited by Browne, Literary History of Persia, 1.
157; Mirkhond, p. 337; Tabari, translated by Noldeke, Geschichte der terser und
Araber, p. 47, Leiden, 1879.
20. Windelband (Eng. tr. Tufts), A History of Philosophy, p. 286, New York.
1905. The Pahlavi writers vehemently attack Mani and his followers. He is
dubbed a druj21 of evil origin,22 and his followers are branded as deceivers,
empty-skulled persons that practised witchcraft and deceitfulness, and taught
folly in the way of secret societies;23 they are denounced as deluding the
uninformed and unintelligent, and as capturing the men of little knowledge
in their esoteric circle.24
21. Dk., vol. 5, p. 315-317.
22. Dk., vol. 4, p. 211.
23. Sg. 10.59, 60.
24. Sg. 10, 75-77. Mani's eclectic system. Mani aimed at forming a world
religion and based his new religion on materials drawn from [341]
Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Christianity, and Syrian Gnosticism. In his
synthetic religion he accepts the dualistic theory as the basic doctrine to
explain the existence of evil. Light which is synonymous with God existed
above and darkness below. Satan arose out of darkness. Twice did he invade
the kingdom of light. Light and darkness are mingled in the confusion of
creation. Light is to be liberated from Darkness and made secure from the
assaults of Darkness. That is the function of man during life. In the final
dispensation Light will dispel Darkness for ever. His new religion differed in
its cardinal principles from Zoroastrianism. The author of Shikand Gumanik
Vijar devotes a chapter (16th) to the teachings of Mani and refutes them.
The subject, however, remains incomplete as the latter part of the work is
lost. Some of the more prominent features of Manichaeism, which are
fundamentally foreign to the spirit of Zoroastrianism, are the ascetic
principles of self-mortification, celibacy, fasting, and the vow of poverty.
Each of these in turn we shall examine from the point of view of

Zoroastrianism, and seek at the same time to determine the basic difference
between the two theories of life.
Mani holds matter to be the root of evil, hence self-mortification of the
body is a virtue in his system. The body as composed of matter, according
to this thinker, is inherently evil. On this very ground he denies the final
resurrection.25 Manichaeism brands all bodily desires as evil and legislates for
their stifling and killing. Since all evil has its root in the body, salvation is
possible only through the extirpation of bodily desires. Mani's system of
religion becomes quietistic, ascetic, and inculcates only passive virtues. He
taught his followers to abhor all natural pleasures and abandon them. He
strove to extinguish the fire of the bodily desires. The devout was to begin
by abstaining from every comfort and from every amusement. In spite of this,
temptations assail him on all sides, so long as he lives in the midst of earthly
attachments. To adopt a practical image, the centipede does not lose much if
one of its legs is broken, so man is not safe when he succeeds in eradicating
one desire, for another takes its place and haunts him in the quiet moments,
even when the ardent longing of communing with the divine consumes him.
He is still overcome by passion, by the [342] desire of wife and child, of
hearth and home. He feels that he cannot liberate himself from the
unbearable yoke of these strong passions, unless he flees from the world to
some solitary place where joys and sorrows cannot reach him. Life, such a
one thinks, is a fleeting illusion. It cannot give him enduring calm.
Accordingly, he breaks his family ties, shuns society, becomes a hermit, and
lives a life of complete quiescence. He courts negation.
25. Sg. 16.50. Zoroastrianism stands for controlling and regulating bodily
desires, but not for supprtssing and killing them. The antithesis of body
and soul, flesh and spirit, is not unknown to the Pahlavi writers. But the body
in itself is not evil. According to Zoroastrianism, matter is not inherently
evil, and life in the flesh is not necessarily death in the spirit. Zarathushtra
legislates for the material as well as the spiritual side of our nature. A healthy
body alone can nurture a healthy mind, and it is through the agency of these
two prime factors that the spirit can work out her destiny. Man can act
righteousness and assail wickedness only with a sound body. The faithful
craves for a long life in the body in this world, before he is allotted an eternal

life of spirit in heaven. Bodily life in this world is sacred, it is a pledge.
Ohrmazd has confided this most precious of his gifts to man that he may
join with his Heavenly Father in securing the ultimate triumph of good over
evil and thus usher the divine Kingdom of Righteousness into the world. The
soul rules over the body as a householder rules over a family or a rider rides
his horse.26 It is the stubborn slave of the soul, and with the exercise of selfcontrol it is to be converted into an obedient servant always ready to carry
out the mandates of its master.27 The body is an indispensable vehicle of the
soul and the saintly soul drives in it on the path of righteousness. It is only in
the case of the wicked, in whom the flesh gains victory over the spirit, that it
becomes a heavy burden, its wheels refuse to move, sticking in the quagmire
of sin. But then the fault lies with the driver. It is only when the individual
lives solely for the body, feasts his lustful eyes on the vices of the flesh, and
is a willing slave to the bodily passions, that the body turns out to be the
grave of the soul.28 Whoso lives in this world for the body [343] alone and is
immersed in bodily pleasures, loses in spirit in the next world, but whoso
works for the soul, makes the spiritual existence more his own.29 Just as a
person going without shoes on a road infested with serpents and scorpions is
constantly on guard lest the noxious creatures bite him, so a man should
always beware of his bodily passions.30 The great Sasanian pontiff Adarbad
said that whenever any harm befell his body, he took consolation that it did
not affect his soul, which was of greater significance.31 Whosoever lives in
this world with a view to the betterment of his soul, reaps the future reward,
but whoso lives exclusively for the body, sees his body ultimately crumbling
into dust with no hopes for the welfare of the spiritual existence.32 The
wicked conducts his soul after the bodily desires, but the righteous man
should regulate his body in conformity with the higher desires of the soul.33
The body is the halter to the soul, and the faithful one is reminded that he
should so act in the world that neither the soul nor the body suffers for the
other, but if that is not possible, he should prefer the soul to the body and be
prepared to sacrifice it for the good of the soul.34 The soul profits when the
inordinate bodily pleasures are foregone.35 The man who is prepared to
dedicate his body for the sake of his soul or religion practises true
generosity.36 Though the body is the bane of the spirit, it is not branded as
inherently evil. Man may work with the body, yet he may live for the soul.
Discipline rather than austerity is the Zoroastrian watchword. Self-

mortification does not form part of the Zoroastrian theology. With due selfcontrol the devout has to conquer the flesh in order to be victor in spirit; he
has to subdue his bodily nature, but not to suppress it. The body is not to be
reduced to a skeleton. Zoroastrianism demands a sound and a strong body to
enable man to effectively combat the hydra of evil in this world.
Uncleanliness of body is one of the ascetic virtues. It is repugnant to the
spirit of Zoroastrianism, which stands for the bodily purity. Purity of body
contributes to purity of [344]spirit. Bodily uncleanliness means spiritual
pollution, and wantonly weakening the body is a sin. Monastic life is
unknown to the Zoroastrians of all periods. Christianity had entered Iran
under the Parthian rule, and monasteries of both the sexes flourished in the
Assyrian Church during the Sasanian period. Far from, exerting any influence
upon the Zoroastrians, they were looked upon with great aversion by them.
26. Dk., vol. 6, p. 353, 380, 381.
27. Dk., vol. 1, p. 56.
28. Dk., vol. 5, p. 469.
29. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. A. 2, p. 33.
30. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. B. 47, p. 49, 50.
31. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. A. 5, p. 35, 36.
32. SLS. 20. 10.
33. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 285, p. 5.
34. Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6. 25, p. 8.
35. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 89, p. 2.
36. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 91, p. 5. Celibacy, a virtue with Mani, a vice with
Zoroaster. Manichaeism extols celibacy as the greatest virtue. For those

initiated in the higher orders Mani advocated celibacy. When the ardent
longing for the love of God swallows up all other desires and becomes the
controlling factor of the devout, he is enjoined to take a vow of continence.
Fie should not enter into matrimonial alliance if he desires to serve God
whole-heartedly. Marriage is declared incompatible with sanctity; it is
accounted impure and defiling. Mani forbids sexual intercourse as the worst
type of uncleanliness.37 Virginity is the highest form of life. Body being the
formation of Ahriman, the propagation of lineage and breeding of families
are evil.38 Marriage prolongs the life of mankind, and so retards the union of
the human species with God. 37. Al-Biruni, p. 190.
38. Sg. 16. 40, 41. All this is in direct antagonism to the teachings of Zoroaster. In no period of the history of his religion was celibacy ever held a
virtue. Those practising it were not considered more holy and held in higher
reverence, as among the Manichaeans, but their action was strongly
reprehended. Even the priests were not to be celibates, for it is a cardinal
point of the faith of every true Zoroastrian that he shall marry and rear a
family.39 Ohrmazd prefers the man who lives a life of marital happiness to
the one who lives in continence.40 Whoso does not marry and propagate
lineage hinders the work of Renovation, and is wicked.41 Marriage is doubly
an obligation, being a religious duty to the Church, a civic duty to the State.
Hence both the Church and the State encouraged married life in Iran. It is
considered a highly meritorious form of charity to help a poor man to
marry.42 Herodotus remarks that the Persian kings gave [345] prizes to those
who were blessed with many children.43 The Zoroastrian works of all periods
exhort the faithful to enter into matrimony. Mar Shiman, the chief bishop of
the Christian settlers in Iran, was accused by the Mobads before Shapur II to
the effect that he and his clergy were teaching men to refrain from marriage
and the procreation of children.44 King Yazdagard II saw great danger to the
State in the spread of such doctrines among the masses. If they caught the
contagion, says his royal edict, the world would soon come to an end.45 Such
were the strong feelings against any form of celibacy that prevailed at all
times in Persia; and even in Mani's system the stringency was generally
relaxed in case of the masses. Marriage was tolerated as a source of relief to
their unrestrained sexual appetites. It was a necessary evil in their case. But in
the case of the clergy and of other righteous persons who aimed at higher

life, it was obligatory that they should be celibates. Zoroastrianism legislates
for the clergy and the laity alike. In Mani's system marriage was a vice for
the priest, a reluctant concession to the layman. According to the religion of
Zoroaster, it is neither the one nor the other; it is a positive virtue for both.
Sacerdotal piety does not tend to celibacy in Iran. It is disapproved for all
and under all circumstances. In no stage of the individual's moral and
spiritual development is marriage ever considered as incompatible with
saintliness.
39. Dk., vol. 9, p. 609, 634, 637, 639; Gs. 123, 155.
40. Vd. 4. 47.
41. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 92, p. 6, 7.
42. Vd. 4. 44.
43. 1. 136.
44. Wigram, History of the Assyrian Church, p. 64, London, 1910.
45. Elisaeus, History of Vartan, p. 13. Fasting recommended by Manichaeism,
condemned by Zoroastrianism. Mani advocated the abstinence from food as
a means of expiation for sin.46 Nearly a quarter of the year was set apart by
him as the period of fast. If there is one thing more than another which
Zoroaster teaches, it is that man shall never serve Ohrmazd by fasting and
austerities, but only by prayers and work. Far from recommending these
ascetic practices as virtues, he prohibits them as sins. Fasting formed no part
of the religion of ancient Iran at any period of her history. It is strongly
reprobated in the works of all periods. Fasting is a sin, and the only fast that
the faithful are exhorted to keep is the fast from sin.47 The wilful abstinence
from food is a deliberate [346] disregard of the bounty of Ohrmazd. In his
exaggerated idea of the need of fasting, the ascetic weakens his body, and
practically starves himself to death by a rigorous system of fasts. Zoroastrianism enjoins that man should take sufficient food to keep his body
strong and active, and not make it languid by withholding the due share of

food from it. With a feeble body man could not work strenuously for the
furtherance of the world of righteousness, and carry on a vigorous warfare
against the world of wickedness; and this, according to the Zoroastrian
belief, is the chief object of man's life on earth.
46. A1-Biruni, p. 190.
47. Sd. 83.1-6.
Mani's doctrine of poverty in the light of Zoroastrianism. The saint in
Mani's system holds earthly things as so many distractions. The things of
sense are impure. He tries to avoid them, and gradually gives them up one by
one. He makes a vow of poverty. Wealth is looked upon as a source of
temptation. Material commodities are regarded as satisfying the lower nature
of man. The accumulation of property beyond that which would enable him
to purchase food for one day or clothing for one year is forbidden.48 The true
hermit renounces all personal effort, does not think of providing for the
morrow, and with passive resignation looks to God for what he may send to
him. All ascetic orders where the vow of poverty is overemphasized give rise
to mendicants and beggars living upon the alms of others. Among other evils
mendicancy brings a drain on the resources of a society. For that reason it is
not consecrated in Zoroastrianism. In fact it was not recognized at any
period in the religious history of Iran. It is not a sin to acquire riches and
accumulate property. The sin originates with the improper use of one's
possessions, and the faithful are expressly warned not to lust for and indulge
exclusively in the accumulation of the material wealth at the expense of the
spiritual.49 This reprimand serves as a corrective to the unbridled desire to
covet earthly riches.50 Wealth of the spirit is undoubtedly superior to that of
the body. As regards the use of the wealth of this world man should work as
if he were going to live a life of a thousand years, and as if what he failed to
do today he could easily perform the next day. But when it comes to the
question [347] of the spiritual riches, he should act with the fear that he
might perhaps live only a day more in this world, and that if he postponed
today's good work till tomorrow, death might overtake him and prevent him
from accomplishing it.51 One should choose rather to be poor for the spirit
than to be rich without it. Losing the spirit for the sake of earthly riches is

wrong. But accumulating earthly riches with upright means and expending
them for the welfare of the spirit is meritorious. Srosh helps the man who has
riches and plenty, and who, far from yielding to temptations, makes good
use of his fortune.52 Wealth helps a righteous man to perform meritorious
deeds,53 whereas grinding poverty at times occasions wickedness.54 If a man
craves for a vast fortune with a firm resolve to spend it for charitable purposes, his desire is laudable.55 It is praiseworthy that man should, spend his
earthly riches for his spiritual welfare.56 Wealth is given to man not to
squander on himself, but to help the poor and the needy, and assuage the
wrongs of suffering humanity.57 When misused, wealth becomes a halter to
the body, and the wise one should sacrifice it, for the good of his soul.58 Man
should not be intoxicated with pride when he is in the plenitude of his riches
and at the height of fortune, and must not hate the poor, for his fortune
might leave him at any moment and place him in the class of the paupers.59
He is reminded that howsoever rich he grows, his wealth could never exceed
that of Jamshid. And yet that great king found his wealth deserting him
when his end approached.60 The kingdoms of the kings with all their
fabulous fortunes are not everlasting.61 One should not be proud of his
fortune. It is but vanity; it is as fleeting and transient as a dream.62 It changes
its masters like a bird that flies from one tree to another, only to leave that in
turn for still another.63 At death wealth and property do not accompany
[348] company the owner, but go into others' possessions.64 None should be
proud of his possessions and count upon them as exclusively his own, for at
the time of death even the palaces and treasures are of no avail, and the
owner does not take them with him on his journey heavenward.65 A wealthy
man rolling in riches is healthy in the morning, becomes ill at noon, and
quietly passes from this world before night; his fortune does not help him to
avert this calamity.66 Wealth and rank are the accidents of life, they do not
constitute the real greatness of man. Righteousness alone is the true riches
and man cannot get it in the next world on loan.67
48. A1-Biruni, p. 190.
49. Dk., vol. 3, p. 129; vol. 5, p. 314, 315; vol. II, bk. 6. 149, 150, p. 49.
50. Dk,, vol. 13, bk. 6. E. 16, p. 4, 5.

51. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 151, p. 49.
52. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 90, p. 4, 5.
53. Dk., vol. 4, p. 192.
54. Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 283, p. 8.
55 Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 310, p. 25, 26.
56. Dk., vol. 6, p. 418.
57. Dk., vol. 3, p. 142; AnAtM. 47.
58. Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6. 26, p. 8, 9.
59. AnAtM. 57.
60. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 152, p. 49, 50.
61. Gs. 1.
62. Gs. 58.
63. AnAtM. 88.
64. AnAtM. 145.
65. Gs. 169.
66. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 200, p. 71, 72.
67. AnKhK. 5.
MAZDAK

The economic basis of his religious reform. The second great heretic of this
period who had a considerable following was a pious Mobad named Mazdak,
son of Bamdat.68 A Pahlavi treatise named Mazdak Namah, Book of Mazdak, is
said to have been rendered into Arabic by Ibnul Muqaffa. The work has been
lost, but its contents have been preserved in other Arabic works.69 The
author of Dabistan says that he met some Mazdakites who practised their
religion secretly among the Mohammedans. These showed him a book
called Desnad, written in Old Persian.70 There are references to Mazdak and
his teachings in Greek and Syriac, Arabic and Persian. He is called the
accursed heterodox who observes fasts,71 who appeared to cause disturbance
among the faithful.72 He was contemporary with Kobad.73 Mazdak agreed
with the fundamental doctrine of Zoroastrianism in respect to the indelible
antithesis between the two principles, Light and Darkness, or Ohrmazd and
[349] Ahriman.74 Masudi calls him a Zendik.75 Tabari, Mirkhond, and others
accuse him of teaching the doctrine of the community of wives.76 The
Dabistan repeats the statement.77 Mazdak's revolutionary reform, however,
was not so much religious as it was social and economic, for he preached
communism, pure and simple. 68. Modi, Mazdak the Iranian Socialist in Dastur
Hoshang Memorial Volume, p. 116-131; Christensen, Two Versions of the History of
Mazdak in Modi Memorial Volume, p. 321-330; Nicholson, Mazdak in ERE. 8,,.
508-510; Pettazoni, La Religione di Zarathustra, p. 199, 200.
69. Browne, A Literary History of Persia, I. 169, New York, 1902.
70. Dabistan, tr. Shea and Troyer, 1. 378.
71. BYt. 2. 21; Phl. Vd. 4. 49.
72. BYt. 1.6.
73. 488-531 A.D.
74. Al-Biruni, tr. Sachau, p. 192; Dabistan, tr. Shea and Troyer, I. 373.
75. Tr. Barbier de Meynard, vol. 2. p. 195.

76. Zotenberg. 2 148-152; Sacy, Memoires sur diverses Antiquites de la Perse, p.
354-356.
77. Shea and Troyer, I. 377, 378.
The account of Mazdak's system is very meagre; but it is known that he
accounted Jealousy, Wrath, and Greed as the three main causes of all evil in
the world. Everyone, according to Mazdak's teachings, should be given
equal opportunity and equal share of the enjoyment of the earthly
possessions of God. So it was originally ordained by God, but that natural
order has been upset by the aggressive strong for their own self-aggrandizement.78 Society should therefore return to that original ideal state. These
revolutionary teachings thrilled for a time Iran, and exercised a powerful
fascination on the masses. The crisis was brought to a head when, far from
taking any initiative to stamp out the heresy, the king encouraged it, and
finally embraced it. His son, Prince Noshirvan, summoned the Dasturs and
Mobads to consider the situation. It was certain that the cult would spread
and the young prince adopted severe measures to suppress it, lest it should
menace the public peace. The clergy who viewed the new heresy with great
alarm, advised rigorous measures to extirpate the threatening creed. Mazdak
did not live long to preach his doctrine, for the prince arranged a banquet for
him and his followers and put them all to the sword in A.D. 528.
78. Tabari, tr. Nöldeke, Geschichte der Terser und Araber zur zeit der Sasaniden, p.
141, 154, Leiden, 1879.
This communistic socialistic sect received therewith a fatal blow from which
it never wholly recovered, but it maintained a feeble spark of life for a
considerable time. The Rawandis, Babak, called al-Khurrami, and alMuqanna, the Veiled Prophet of Khurasan, later embodied the salient
teachings of Mazdak in their system.79
79. Browne, op, tit., 1.316-318; 328. [350]
CHAPTER XXXVIII
OHRMAZD

The supreme godhead. Ohrmazd is the Pahlavi equivalent of the Avestan
Ahura Mazda in the Pahlavi writings of the Sasanian period and later. The
concept of the Highest Being retains its former abstract and spiritual
character in the works of the Pahlavi writers. Ohrmazd is what the entire
creation is not, and he is not what anything in the universe is. The author of
the Denkard describes him by negatives, and states that Ohrmazd is the
sovereign, and not slave; father, and not child; first, and, not last; master, and
not servant; lord, and not serf; protector, and not protected; changeless, and
not changeable; knowledge itself, and not acquiring knowledge; giver and
not receiver.1 Radiant and glorious are his standing epithets in the Pazend
prayers. We shall presently discuss some of the most prominent of the divine
attributes which the Pahlavi works ascribe to Ohrmazd.
1. Vol. 3, p. 176,177.
Ohrmazd is eternal. Ohrmazd had no beginning and has no end. He alone
is the one who is neither born nor dies.2 His adversary is inferior to him in
this respect, that there will be a time when he will not exist. Ohrmazd ever
was, is, and will ever be.3 He is the causer of causes, himself being causeless.4
He is the prime source of existence.5
2. Ba Nâm-i Yazad in Pazend Texts, p. 210.
3. Bd. 1. 3; Dk. vol. 2, p. 103; Gs. 128; Duâ-i Nam Sitâyishn in Pazend Texts, p.
159.
4. Dk., vol. 9, p. 572.
5. Dk., vol. 3. p. 157.
Ohrmazd is invisible. The concept of the spirituality of Ohrmazd remains
unchanged. He is the Spirit of Spirits.6 Invisibility is the chief characteristic
of spirituality, and Ohrmazd is said to be invisible.7 He is so even to the
other spiritual beings.8 Though present in everything, he is unseen
anywhere.9 When [351] Viraf is escorted by Srosh and Atar to the celestial
court, and presented by Vohuman to Ohrmazd he hears the voice of

Ohrmazd, sees a light, but does not see him face to face.10 The souls of the
righteous ones behold the place of Ohrmazd in heaven, and console
themselves as having seen Ohrmazd himself.11
6. Dd. 31. 6; Sg, 1. 2; Dk., vol. 2, p. 103; Dua-i Nam Sitâyishn in Pazend Texts,
p. 159.
7. Dk., vol. 6, p. 390.
8. Dd. 31. 6.
9. Dk., vol. 3, p. 174. 350.
10. AV. 11, 1-6; 101. 10-12.
11. Dd. 19, 4.
He is intangible. The Gathic and Later Avestan texts spoke figuratively of
the hands, mouth, eyes, and body of Ohrmazd. In the Pahlavi texts
Zaratusht is portrayed as sitting by the side of the Lord and saying to him
that the head, hands, feet, hair, mouth, tongue, and even clothes of
Ohrmazd resembled his own and therefore he wished to grasp the Heavenly
Father with his hands. Ohrmazd thereupon tells him that this is impossible,
for, as the godhead, he is intangible.12 A later text, on the contrary, speaks of
Ohrmazd as taking hold of the prophet's hand and giving him wisdom in the
shape of water to swallow.13
12. SLS. 15.2,3.
13. BYt. 2, 4, 5.
He is omniscient. In his knowledge of the past, present, and future Ohrmazd
is without an equal.14 It is he alone who is called the all-knowing one.15 He
knows all that is to come, and is aware of the final overthrow and end of his
adversary.16 Through his wisdom it is that man can guide himself to the path
of righteousness.17 Owing to his power of comprehending everything, he is

the best judge of man.18 He knows the inmost recesses of man's heart, for no
secrets are hid from him.
14. Bd. 1. 2; Dk. vol. l.p. 34.
15. Bd. 1. 2; Sg. 1. 1; 8. 49; Dk. vol. 1. p. 34; vol. 2, p. 103 ; vol. 3, p. 140;
vol. 5, p. 331 ; vol. 6, p. 390, 412, 416; vol. 7, p. 440, 452; Vol. 8, p. 429,
461, 485; vol. 9, p. 594; Jsp., p. 110; Dua-i Nâm Sitâyishn; Namâz-i Dâdâr
Ahuramazd; Nâm-i Khâvar; Sitâyishn-i Ahuramazd in Pazend Texts, p. 159, 206,
212, 243.
16. Bd 1. 13, 17, 20; Zsp 1. 2; Dk., vol. 4, p. 258.
17. Dk., vol. 3. p. 174.
18. Dk., vol. 7, p. 473.
He is omnipotent. Despite his rival who always thwarts his work, Ohrmazd
is called omnipotent and all-ruling.19 Everything in the world has some
superior, Ohrmazd alone has none.20 He is not wanting in anything.21 The
strongest of men feels [352] himself impotent before the Lord. There are
moments in each man's life during which his strength fails him, and he longs
for the invisible power to lean upon. Ohrmazd is the power to turn to, for he
is all-protecting.22 He is the sustainer and helper of the helpless, guardian of
the rich and the poor, liberator of those in distress and averter of all harm.23
19. Sg. 1. 1; Dk., vol. 1, p. 34; vol. 2, p. 103; vol. 3, p. 140, 157; vol. 6, p.
390, 412; vol. 7, p. 440; Duâ-i Nâm Sitâyishn; Ba Nâm-i Yazad; Namâz-i Dâdâr
Ahuramazd; Sitâyishn-i Ahuramazd in Pazend Texts, p. 159, 206-208, 243.
20. Dk., vol. 3, p. 177.
21. Dk., vol. 3, p. 174; vol. 6, p. 412.
22. Dk., vol. 7, p. 440; Duâ-i Nam Sitâyishn in Pazend Texts, p. 159.

23. Namâz-i Dâdâr Ahuramazd; Ba Nâm-i Yazad, Sipâs-i Akenâreh, Nâm-i Khâvar;
Sitâyishn-i Ahuramazd in Pazend Texts, p. 206, 209, 211, 212, 243.
Ohrmazd is the creator and conservator of creation. He has created the
entire creation.24 He has created the Amshaspands and Izads, the paradise
and Garotman, the shining sun and the brilliant moon, stars and the wind,
water and fire, earth and trees, cattle and metals and men. He has given
movements to the heavens and upholds them without pillars. He has given
eyes to see and ears to hear and tongue to speak and hands to hold and feet
to walk.25 Through his wisdom he has brought the world into being and
exercises his providential care to maintain it.26 He is the father of man,27
whom he has created as the greatest in all creation and has endowed with the
power of thinking.28 It is man's sacred duty to obey his heavenly creator.29
He is the father and lord of creation.30 He has created the good creatures,
that they may participate in removing the blemish-giver from the world.31
Like the weaver he has woven multifarious objects on the loom of nature.32
Progress of his creatures is his constant wish.33 He is the eternal source of all
blessings and benefactions.
24. Dk., vol. 3, p 163, 179.
25. Duâ-i Nâm Sitâyishn; Namâz-i Dâdâr Ahuramazd, Ba Nâm-i Yazad; Sipâs-i
Akenâreh; Nâm-i Khâvar; Sitâyishn-i Ahuramazd in Pazend Texts, p. 159, 206-209,
211, 212, 243.
26. Dk., vol. 5, p: 324; vol. 12, bk. 6. 311, p. 26.
27. Gs. 122.
28. Duâ-i Nâm Sitâyishn in Pazend Texts, p. 159.
29. Dk., vol. 4, p. 268.
30. Dk., vol. 5, p. 323.
31. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 135, p. 39; Duâ-i Nâm Sitâyishn in Pazend Texts, p. 159.

32. Dk., vol. 7, p. 425.
33. Dd. 3. 1,2.
He is all-good. The creator is supreme in goodness,34 he is all-goodness
without any evil.35 Whatever is good in the world proceeds from him.36 He is
the fountain of goodness as he is the [353] source of glory and light and
happiness.37 He is benevolent and beneficent.38 He is foremost in goodness;39
always wishing good, and never contemplating evil of any kind.40 His goodness extends to the good and evil alike,41 for his desire is all-beneficent.42
This is manifest from the infinite care which he takes of his creatures,43 as he
is the preserver and protector of man through his perfect goodness.44 Man
should discipline his soul to trust in the goodness of Ohrmazd. Young and
old, it is said, should think a hundred thousand times daily about the
numerous blessings showered upon them by Ohrmazd, for ungratefulness on
their part would lead their souls to the abode of woe.45
34. Bd. 1. 2.
35. Zsp. 1. 17.
36. Dk.,vol. 12, bk. 6. 1. 2, p. 38. 37 Sitâyish-i Depmihr in Pazend Texts, p. 257.
38 Dua-i Nam Sitâyishn; Namâz-i Dâdâr Ahuramazd; Ba Nâm-i Yazad; Sipâs-i
Akenâreh; Nâm-i Khâvar, Sitâyishn-i Ahuramazd in Pazend Texts, p. 159, 206-209,
211, 212, 243.
39 Dd. 37. 127; Dk., vol. 4, p. 194.
40 Mkh. 8. 22.
41 Mkh. 38. 4.
42 Sg. 8. 53.

43 Sg. 8.57,58.
44 Dk., vol. 3, p. 140.
45 Ba Nâm-i Yazad in Pazend Texts, p. 209, 210.
He is all-merciful. The Heavenly Father is the source of mercy and is allmerciful.46 He is the lord of beneficence.47 He is merciful to those who turn
to him in joy and sorrow. When man look to Ahriman and not to Ohrmazd
for guidance, he incurs the divine displeasure. Yet even if man in this way
may be out of Ohrmazd's approbation, he is still not out of his mercy. The
deity knows the infirmities of human nature and the weaknesses of the
human heart, and forgives man's inequity and transgression, if, penitent, the
sinner approaches his Heavenly Father with heartfelt contrition,48 firmly
resolving to redeem his sinful past by good deeds present and future. 46.
Dk., vol. 6, p. 385.
47. Mkh. 1. 1.
48. Dk., vol. 1, p. 9; Duâ-i Nâm Sitâyishn; Namâz-i Dâdâr Ahuramazd; Ba Nâm-i
Yazad in Pazend Texts, p. 159, 206-208.
At the end of time, Ohrmazd will gather back all his creatures to himself.49
Even the sinners will not be lost forever. Yet all this while the merciful Lord
desires that man may not even now leave his blessed company, for it grieves
him that man should suffer even temporarily through his own perverse
conduct, and thus postpone the ultimate renovation.
49. Dk., vol. 6, p. 416.
[354] Ohrmazd is light physically, morally he is truth. When Viraf, as
hallowed visitant of true faith to the realms supernal, is escorted by Srosh
and Atar as angel guides to the presence of Ohrmazd, he finds to his utter
bewilderment that, although the almighty Lord is graciously pleased to greet
him with audible divine words, he himself can see nothing in the ineffable
presence but the sovereign light.50 This endless light is emblematic of

Ohrmazd, who dwells therein.51 All light proceeds from Ohrmazd.52 In the
moral sphere Ohrmazd is eternal truth. Porphyry of Tyre53 says that he
learnt from the Magi that they upheld the view that the body of Ohrmazd
resembled light, and his soul was a likeness of truth.54
50. AV 101. 4-12.
51. Bd. 1. 2;Zsp. 1.2.
52. Gs. 132.
53. About 230-3C0 A. D.
54. Vita Pyth., 41.
He is all-just. Great is the goodness of Ohrmazd, but his justice demands
that he shall not make awards regardless of the merits or demerits of man.
He is the divine law-giver, and as such he is the sovereign judge. The guilty
man who affronts him, the sinner who lives and moves without contrition in
his heart, the rebel who discards divine authority, all need a corrective. As
the lord of mercy he forgives, but as the lord of justice he punishes as well.
He is the giver of the reward of merit,55 and does not let pass a single good
deed of man unrewarded.56
55. Dk., vol. 6. p. 361.
56. Dk., vol. 6, p. 385, 386.
Man should devote himself body and soul to Ohrmazd. Man has an inborn
impulse that prompts him to strive after the divine. He looks to God for the
satisfaction of the yearnings of his heart, even though the Evil Spirit ever
struggles to steal away his heart from Ohrmazd. In the age-long conflict
between good and evil, man's soul forms the prize of the two combatants.
Whether he shall be a willing prize in the hands of Ohrmazd, or a rebel prey
in the clutches of Ahriman, rests with him. Man, therefore, should learn to
know himself. Religion best teaches him to do this. This knowledge of the

self it is that will put him into right relation with his Heavenly Father, and
thus save him from falling a victim to Druj.57 Man toils to teach the parrot
and the pet nightingale, but neglects to tame himself in the service of the
Lord. The animal in his makeup asserts itself under such circumstances and
prevents his spirit from singing glory to his creator. Man's evil thoughts and
sensual appetites, [355] hampering his spiritual growth, prove to be only so
many turns and win dings that lead him astray from the path of Ohrmazd to
that of Ahriman. Well can we see why man has constantly to beware of
these; the tempestuous storm may overtake him at any moment, if he has not
made any provision in the hour of calm. There is no hope for the individual
who demeans and debases himself, and is loath to leave the path of
wickedness. It is through the help of Ohrmazd that man can liberate himself
from the evil designs of Ahriman, and make himself worthy for eternal
bliss.58 57. Dk., vol. 6, p. 356.
58. Dk., vol. 7, p. 441.
Man should further know Ohrmazd, for to know him is to follow him. This
is the desire of the godhead.59 He loves man with the love of a father for his
child.60 It behooves man to live in accordance with the divine will, and to
offer to him worship and glorification.61 He is worthy of man's praise
because of his wise dispensation unto man.62 Purity of thought, word, and
deed is the most acceptable sacrifice to be given to Ohrmazd. The righteous
person who furthers his creation by his holy deeds pleases him most.63 59.
Mkh. 40. 24, 25; Dk., vol. 7, p. 444; vol. 10, bk. 6. 31, p. 10.
60. Dk., vol. 7, p. 441.
61. Dk., vol. 9, p. 641.
62. Dk., vol. 6, p. 390.
63. Dk., vol. 8, p. 489.
Devotion to Ohrmazd should dominate man's entire being, and man stands
firm as a rock in the midst of trials and sufferings as long as he lives for

Ohrmazd. Woe unto him who ceases to be good, for Ohrmazd departs from
his sinful person and the wicked man becomes a partner of Ahriman.64 The
strongest of the strong has to turn to God for succour in the moment of
overwhelming trouble, and Ohrmazd's help is the best preservative of man
from all calamities. In the moment of the bitterest anguish, when man's heart
sinks under sorrow, when cramping and sordid poverty brings depression,
when the cup of misery is filled to the brim, and the spirit is wrung with
grief, man finds the final refuge in him.65 When man is devoutly resigned to
Ohrmazd, he is saved from all troubles.66 64. Dk., vol. 3, p. 179.
65. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 126, p. 33.
66. Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6. 28, p. 9.
In his divinity, moreover, Ohrmazd desires that man shall not come to him
simply when reduced to dire extremities, but shall be constant in his
devotion, whether amid happiness or in misery. [356] Man shall not serve
him because he fears him, but because he loves him. The devout shall not
remember him in need, and forget him in plenty; nor shall he pay homage to
Ohrmazd in the temple, and bend his knees to Ahriman outside.
The Holy Spirit. Spena Menu is the Pahlavi equivalent of the Avestan
Spenta Mainyu, or the Holy Spirit, and occurs especially in the great Pahlavi
work Denkard as the divine attribute of Ohrmazd. Instances may, however,
be cited in which the Holy Spirit, here as in the Gathas, seems to have been
regarded as being separate from Ohrmazd.67 Like the Younger Avestan texts,
the Denkard speaks of the creation of the Holy Spirit.68 He is the source of
all virtue, as his rival Gana Menu or Ahriman is the originator of vice.69 The
good qualities of man that make him righteous are derived from him.70 To
know Spena Menu, is to reach him,71 and the devout person who is in spiritual communion with the Holy Spirit prospers in this world.72 When a man is
possessed of the power of Spena Menu, he is able to rout the Evil Spirit,73
but when he sinfully puts out the Holy Spirit from his person, he exposes
himself to the danger of being overpowered by the arch-fiend.74 Spena Menu
warns man of the temptations of the Evil Spirit, and inspires him with pious
thoughts.75 67. Dk., vol. 2, p. 120; vol. 4, p. 194; vol. 5, p. 297, 328.

68. Vol. 5, p. 325; vol. 8, p. 442.
69. Dk., vol. 5, p. 348.
70. Dk., vol. 5, p. 341.
71. Dk., vol. 8, p. 442.
72. Dk., vol. 5, p. 328, 340; vol. 8, p. 441, 442.
73. Dk., vol. 4, p. 208, 209.
74. Dk., vol. 2, p. 108.
75. Dk., vol. 4. p. 250-252.
Vohuman, the genius of wisdom, and also the innate wisdom, are the
products of Spena Menu,76 and it is the Holy Spirit that bestows the gift of
divine wisdom upon man.77 In fact the Mazdayasnian religion itself is the
innate intelligence of Spena Menu.78 76. Dk., vol. 3, p. 158.
77. Dk., vol. 8, p. 477.
78. Dk., vol. 8, p. 474.
Spena Menu will ultimately triumph over the wicked Gana Menu,79 and
banish evil from the world.80 79. Dk., vol. 4, p. 252, 253; vol. 7, p. 462; vol.
S, p. 441.
80. Dk., vol. 5, p. 326.

[357]
CHAPTER XXXIX

AMSHASPANDS
The archangels. The Avestan designation Amesha Spenta, representing the
highest celestial beings, now assumes the form Amshaspand or
Amahraspand. With Ohrmazd as the president of the celestial council the
Amshaspands are seven in number1, though occasionally Goshurun and
Neryosangh are also classed among the archangels.2 A late Pazend prayer
called Shtkasta-i Shaitan, or the Annihilation of Satan, augments the list of
the Amshaspands and speaks of them as being thirty-three in number.
Ohrmazd has created his colleagues.3 They are both males and females.4 The
first seven days of each month bear their names.5 Every one of the group has
a special flower dedicated to him or her.6 Their abode is in the all-glorious,
all-delightful Best Existence.7 A later Pahlavi-Pazend work states that the
seven Amshaspands have emanated one from the other, that is, the second
from the first, the third from the second, and so on.8
1. Zsp. 21. 12; 22. 1; Dd. 43. 8, 9.
2. SLS. 22. 14; Dk., SBE. vol. 47, bk. 7. 2. 21, p. 23.
3. Bd. 1.23,26.
4. BYt. 2.64.
5. Bd. 27. 24; SLS. 22. 1-7; 23. 1.
6. Bd. 27. 24.
7. Dd. 74. 2; 94. 12.
8. Jsp. 110.
Their attributes. The Amshaspands are immortal, invisible,9 intangible,10 of
great wisdom, friendly to the good creation, the forgiving ones,11 holy, wise,
far-seeing, beneficent and intelligent.12 Inasmuch as they owe their existence
to Ohrmazd they are finite,13 yet so great is their brilliance that Zaratusht
does not see his own shadow on the ground when he approaches them in

heavenly conference.14
9. Dd. 74. 2; Dk., vol. 1, p. 47.
10. SLS. 15.3.
11. Dd. 74.3.
12. Jsp. p. 110.
13. Dk. vol. 2, p. 114.
14. Zsp. 21.13.
Their work. Various are the boons that the archangels give unto men.15 Just
as in the Later Avestan descriptions, they [358] come down to the sacrifice,16
and accept the prayers and offerings of pious men, if performed with
accuracy; but they do not grace the ceremony with their august presence
when it is performed by impious persons, and with faulty recitals.17 They
dwell in the man over whom wisdom has full sway,18 and those men alone
who are blessed with superior wisdom are under their protection.19 Three
times every day they form an assembly in the fire-temples and shed good
works and righteousness around for the advantage of the devout votaries that
frequent the sacred places.20 It is the will and pleasure of Ohrmazd that
mankind shall propitiate them, and Zaratusht is commissioned to exhort
mankind so to do.21 Ohrmazd further tells the prophet that the recital of
their names is good, the sight of them is better, but to carry out their
commands is best.22 Man should be quick to speak the truth, ever thinking
that the invisible archangels are standing by his side to watch him.23
Ohrmazd confers with them in regard to creating Zaratusht on earth, and
they help the godhead in this great work.24 They rout the demons,25 and join
naturally in lending assistance to Tishtar in his struggle with Aposh.26 They
successfully conduct Zaratusht through the three ordeals in heaven-the first
by fire, the second by molten metal, and the third by the knife. All the
symbolic bearing of these tests they explain to him as the veritable trials to
prove the steadfastness of the faithful when called upon, in troublous times,

to vindicate the truth of the religion.27 15. SLS. 22, 1-7.
16. SLS. 19. 7.
17. SLS. 9. 10.
18. Dk., vol. 3, p. 159.
19. Dk., vol. 8, p. 462, 463.
20. SLS. 20. 1; Dk., vol 12, bk. 6. 301. p. 15.
21. SLS. 15.30.
22. Zsp. 21 18.
23. Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 91, p. 5,6.
24. Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 2. 19-35, p. 22-26. 25. Bd. 30.29.
26. Dd. 93.13, 14.
27. Zsp. 21.24-27.
The thirty days of the month are presided over by seven Amshaspands and
twenty-three Izads. Each Amshaspand takes three or four Izads as his hamkârs,
co-workers, to accomplish certain functions. Ohrmazd, for example, takes
Depadar, Depmihr, and Depdin, to rout the accursed Ahriman. Vohuman
has Mohor, Gosh, and Ram for his comrades to smite the cruel Eshm. [359]
Artavahisht is joined by Atar, Srosh, and Vahram in the work of combating
the demon of cold and the torments of Aposh and Spenjagra. Khurshed,
Mihr, Asman, and Aniran join Shatravar to smite Bushasp, the demon of
sloth. Spandarmad has Aban, Din, Ashishvang, and Marespand as her
comrades in her struggle with Astovidhot, the bone-breaker or the demon of
death. Khurdad is helped by Tishtar, Vad, and Farvardin in his fight with the
demons of avarice, Tarich and Zarich. Amardad is joined by Rashn, Ashtad,

and Zamyat to co-operate with him in withstanding the demons of thirst and
hunger.28 28. Afrin-i haft Amshâspand in Pazend Texts, p. 86-88.
The great change wrought in the concept of the function of the
Amshaspands, in contradistinction to Gathic and Later Avestan times, is that
their work of guarding the concrete objects of the world receives greater
attention than their prime work of enforcing the abstract virtues which they
personify. In the Pahlavi period they have severally been assigned the work
of guarding seven worldly creations, man, animals, fire, metal, earth, water,
and plants.29 The text just cited goes further and asserts that each
Amshaspand has produced his own creation.30 These objects are the
counterparts of the Amshaspands, and their propitiation is equivalent to
propitiating their spiritual masters.31
29. SLS. 13.14; 15, 5.
30. SLS. 15.4.
31. Sls. 15.6.
VOHUMAN
His materialization. Ohrmazd is the father of Vohuman, or Good Mind,
who is the first, after the godhead, in the entire creation,32 and therefore
standing next only to Ohrmazd himself.33 He is possessed of good thoughts,
peace-giving and evil-smiting, courageous and noble.34 Vohuman is
intangible,35 but is depicted as assuming the form of a man when he is
commissioned by Ohrmazd to hold a conference with Zaratusht about the
new faith. The prophet sees Vohuman coming from the southern regions.36
The archangel seems to be of as great height as three [360] men's spears and
he holds a twig, the spiritual symbol of religion, in his hand.37 Another text
speaks of him as coming in the form of a handsome, brilliant, and elegant
man, of nine times the height of Zaratusht, clad in rich, shining clothes.38
When Vohuman escorted Zaratusht to the council of the Amshaspands, the
prophet saw that Vohuman took only nine steps to cover as much space in
walking as he himself did in ninety steps.39 The pure, white garment, the
sacred shirt of the faithful, is designated as Vohuman's raiment.40

32. Bd. 1. 23; Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 38, 6, p. 274; Dk., vol. 1, p. 34.
33. Dk., vol. 9, p. 572-574.
34. Afrin-i Rapithwin; Sitâyish-i Vohuman in Pazend Texts, p. 98, 224.
35. SLS 15. 3.
36. Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3. 51, p. 47, 48.
He protects Zaratusht from the time of the prophet's birth, and helps him
in his prophetic work. Ohrmazd consults Vohuman together with
Artavahisht about the appropriate time of sending Zaratusht to the world,
and Vohuman accordingly works miraculously to facilitate the birth of
Zaratusht.41 He enters into the reason of the infant,42 and makes the child
laugh immediately at birth.43 When Ahriman lets loose the fiends to destroy
the babe, Ohrmazd sends Vohuman to save it.44 The archangel hastens to
the home of Zaratusht and dispels Akoman, whom he finds there.45 When
the child prophet, according to the legend, was put in the den of wolves by
the wizards, Vohuman, with the help of Srosh, took a sheep full of milk at
night and suckled the child.46 The Gathas refer to Vohuman's coming to
Zaratusht in order to impart to him enlightenment. We have in the Pahlavi
texts the details of their meeting and their conversation. On being
questioned by Vohuman as to his most ardent desire, Zaratusht declared it to
be righteousness,47 and Vohuman even conducted him into the celestial
council.48 Ohrmazd, as the Pahlavi writings record, sent Vohuman along
with the other Amshaspands to the court of Vishtasp in order that they
might testify to the truth of the sacred mission of the prophet.49 The
archangel is the friend of Zaratusht.50
37. Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 3. 52, p. 48.
38. Zsp. 21.8.
39. Zsp. 21. 12.

40. Dd. 39. 19; 40.2.
41. Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 2, 17, 19, 24-26, 29, 33, p. 22-26.
42. Zsp. 20.3.
43. Zsp. 14. 12; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 5. 2. 5, p. 123.
44. Zsp. 14.9.
45. Zsp. 14.10, 11.
46. Zsp. 16.9; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk» 7. 3. 17, p. 39.
47. Zsp. 21. 9, 10; Dk., SBE., vol 47, bk. 7. 3. 54-59, p. 48, 49.
48. Zsp. 21. 11; Dk.; SBE., vol. 47, bk; 7. 3. 60-62, p. 49, 50.
49. Dk., vol. 9, p. 615, 616; SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 4. 74-82; p. 67-70.
50. Dk., SBE., vol37, bk. 9. 38. 12; p. 276.
[361] Vohuman's functions. He was one of the bearers of religion from the
Deity to Siamak, the son of the first human pair.51 He co-operates with
Tishtar in pouring down rain on the earth.52 He, as a divine aid, helps man to
perform meritorious deeds.53 It is the duty of Vohuman to record the doings
of men three times every day, and to keep account of their thoughts, words,
and deeds.54 As the recorder of the actions of mankind in the material world,
he naturally appears in connection with the celestial assize which takes
account of the doings of the souls when they proceed to the next world after
death.55 When the pious soul approaches heaven he welcomes it, and assigns
its place and reward in paradise.56 Vohuman gives reward to him who practises virtue, and teaches mankind to refrain from sin.57 It is Vohuman who
pictures the final good at the Renovation to children if they turn out to be
righteous, and it is for this reason that children who are innocent are always

cheerful.58 At the time of the renovation of the universe man will profit
through the friendship of Vohuman,59 and it is Vohuman who ushers in the
Messianic benefactors, and brings Hoshedar, Hoshedarmah, and Soshyos
into conference with Ohrmazd.60 Vohuman will smite forever his adversary
Akoman, the demon of evil thought, at the final restoration of the world.61
51. Dk., vol. 7, p. 457.
52. Bd. 7. 3; Zsp. 6. 3.
53. Dk., vol. 8, p. 446.
54. Dd. 14.2.
55. Dd. 31.11.
56. Dd. 31. 5; Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 8. 44. 78, p. 164.
57. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 47. 15, p. 306.
58. Dk., vol. 8, p. 439.
59. Gs. 158.
60. Phl. Ys. 28. 9.
61. Bd. 30.29.
Goodness and wisdom abound in man when he welcomes Vohuman as his
guest. Ohrmazd tells Zaratusht that the one who welcomes Vohuman learns
the distinction between the ways of good and of evil.62 Reverence for
Vohuman brings submission to virtue, and man thereby detects his inner
tendency to evil and sin.63 Through the possession of Vohuman he comes to
a better understanding of good and evil,64 and the possession of Vohuman
serves to explain to him Vohuman's true nature.65 The man who loves
Vohuman and his wisdom learns the [362] discrimination between good and

evil and thus gratifies Ohrmazd.66 The creator has put Vohuman in man's
body to withstand Ako-man.67 He resides in the human conscience and
imparts wisdom;68 and when he is lodged and treasured in the heart of the
faithful, he increases man's knowledge of religion.69 Light, purity, perfume,
and the archangels are in the man who welcomes Vohuman as his guest,70
and that individual in whom Vohuman predominates is rich in contentment,
and receives praise in both the worlds.71 Peace and righteousness prevail,
when one's will is ruled by Vohuman. Whoever entertains this celestial being
as his guest purifies his own thoughts, words, and deeds;72 and the man that
has Vohuman as his guest becomes staunch in virtue.73 The lover of
Vohuman spreads instruction of virtue in the world.74 Anyone, furthermore,
who speaks words of virtue sacrifices unto Vohuman.75 In order that
Vohuman may dwell in man, every vestige of evil should be destroyed.
When he has taken his seat in man, wrath and avarice and evil deeds disappear; but when man indulges in these vices, Vohuman departs from him.76
Sin flees away where Vohuman resides;77 and prosperity, good reputation,
and piety ensue where Vohuman has his dwelling-place in man.78 He
becomes righteous, who makes Vohuman his own.79 Vohuman is besought to
grant wisdom and good thought.80 Man is exalted by imbibing the superior
knowledge of Vohuman,81 and wisdom comes through the friendship of
Vohuman.82 The archangel preserves intelligence in man,83 and endows him
with wisdom.84 Man gets the innate and acquired wisdom through him.85
62. Dd. 7.7.
63. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 53. 33, p, 335. 336.
64. Dk , SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 31. 14, p. 248.
65. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 51. 10, p. 320, 321.
66. Dk., SBE., vol 37, bk. 9. 54. 6, p. 341, 342.
67. Dk., vol. 9, p. 625.
68. Dk., vol. 8, p. 480, 481.

69. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 50. 14, p. 313, 314.
70. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 67. 4, p. 382.
71. Dk., vol. 3, p. 159.
72. Dk., vol. l,p. 27, 28.
73. Dd. 3. 14; Dk., SBE., vol. 37. bk. 9. 47. 16, p. 306, 307.
74. Dk, SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9. 63. 9, p. 372.
75. Dk., SBE , vol. 37, bk. 9. 52. 3, p. 323. 76. Sg. 8. 128, 129; Sitâyish-i
Vohuman in Pazend Texts, p. 244.
77. Dk., vol, 11, bk. 6. 193, p. 69.
78. Dk., vol. 6, p. 410, 411.
79. Sitâyish-i Vohuman in Pazend Texts, p. 244.
80. SLS. 22.2.
81. Dk., vol. 6, p. 413, 414.
82. Dk., vol. 6, p. 357.
83. Dk., vol. 3, p. 152.
84. Dk., vol. 8, p. 471, 472.
85. Âfrin-i Rapithwin; Sitâyish-i Vohuman in Pazend Texts, p. 98, 244.
[363] On the material side Vohuman is the patron divinity of animals. In
the creation of this world, cattle are placed under the care of Vohuman.86

The true follower of Zaratusht nourishes and feeds them, protects them from
oppressors, and delivers them not over to cruel tyrants; it is such a one that
propitiates Vohuman;87 for cattle are the counterparts of Vohuman, and he
who is good to them reaps the benefit of both the worlds.88 Vohuman,
accordingly, asks Zaratusht in his conference with the prophet to maintain
the species of certain classes of animals in the world.89
86. SLS. 13. 14; 15, 5.
87. SLS. 15. 9, 10.
88. SLS. 15. 11, Afrin-i Rapithwin; Sitdyish-i Vohuman in Pazend Texts p. 98, 244.
89. Zsp. 22. 6.
ARTAVAHISHT
His zeal for the protection of fire now supersedes his primal work of
guarding righteousness. Artavahisht is the Pahlavi form of the Avestan name
read as Asha Vahishta, and really preserves the older form, Arta.
Righteousness, glory, light, and healing are from him.90 Righteousness, over
which this archangel presides, remains still in the Pahlavi period the cardinal
word of the religion, but this divine personality is less frequently mentioned
in connection with the abstract virtue than in connection with fire, the
physical object which is under his tutelage.91 Fire is his earthly counterpart,
and whoso procures wood and incense for the fire by honest means
propitiates him.92 For that reason, Artavahisht in his conference with
Zaratusht, commissions the sage to teach the people of the world not to illtreat fire.93 Ohrmazd has given him sovereignty in heaven, with the power of
refusing admission therein to those who have displeased him.94 The Denkard
tells us that he excluded the soul of the mighty hero Kersasp, because,
despite his great heroic works by which he had saved the world from the
atrocities of monsters, he had once extinguished fire.95 The Shayast-laShayast incidentally records that Artavahisht is invisible.96
90. Afrin-i Rapithwin, Sitâyish-i Ardibahisht in Pazand Texts, p. 98. 244.

91. Ib. 92. SLS. 15.5, 12, 13.
93. Zsp. 22.7.
94. Sd. 11. 5.
95. Dk., SBE., vol. 18, p. 369-382; vol. 37, bk. 9. 15. 3, 4, p. 199.
96. SLS. 15. 3.
[364] His work. He accompanies Vohuman to protect Zaratusht when he
was born, and when he became a prophet, the archangel goes to the royal
court of Vishtasp as an envoy of Ohrmazd to convince him of the divine
nature of the seer's mission.97 Ohrmazd sends through him also a cup of
immortal drink to King Vishtasp to enlighten that monarch with spiritual
vision.98 We can see, therefore, why Artavahisht is implored to grant
understanding and intelligence.99 When a sick person is healed, the spiritual
debt is due to Artavahisht.100 He is the mighty power that will smite his
adversary Indar at the Renovation.101
97. Zsp. 23. 7; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7. 2. 17, 19, 24, 25, 29, p, 22-25; 4. 75,
78, p. 67-69.
98. Dk., SBE, vol. 47, bk. 7. 4. 84-86, p. 70, 71.
99. SLS. 22. 3.
100. Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 8. 37. 14, p, 116.
101. Bd. 30. 29.
SHATRAVAR
Once the genius of the Divine Kingdom of Ohrmazd, but in the Pahlavi
period the guardian spirit of the mineral kingdom only. The abstract virtue
of sovereign power which this archangel personified is unknown throughout
the Pahlavi literature, his activity being now mainly restricted to metal,

Which is placed under his guardianship.102 When Shatravar confers With
Zoroaster in heaven he advises him to teach mankind to make good use of
metals.103 Metals are the special product of Shatravar, and those who desire
to profit in both the worlds through the propitiation of this genius of those
elements should not give gold and silver to the wicked, or make any ill use of
them.104 It is said that the best way of such propitiation of the divine
personage is to be pure and unsullied of the heart, so that even if one is
subjected to the ordeal of the molten metal and the burning liquid is poured
on his breast, one may not burn and die like a sinner, but may come out of
the trial as successful as the great Sasanian Dastur Adarbad, who felt as if
milk were being poured on his breast when he voluntarily submitted himself
to this test for the good of the religion.105 As the lord of the [365] hidden
treasures of the earth Shatravar is asked to grant wealth;106 and in the final
battle between good and evil he will assail his adversary Sovar and destroy
him.107 102. Bd. 30. 19; SLS. 13 14, 39; 15. 5; Afrin-i Rapithwin; Sitâyish-i
Shahrivar in Pazand Texts, p. 98, 99, 244.
103. Zsp. 22.8.
104. SLS. 15. 18, 19.
105. SLS. 15. 15, 17.
106. SLS. 22. 4.
107. Bd. 30. 29.
It is interesting to note that Shatravar appears in the Pazend form Shahrevar
on the coins of the Indo-Scythian kings Kanishka and Huvishka as early as
the latter part of the first century.
SPANDARMAD
Her work. She is perfect-minded, wise, and of efficacious eyes.108 She gives
bodily strength and vigour unto man,109 and has the lodgment in man's
will.110 Any one who entertains her as his guest becomes truly devotional.111
The advice of this female archangel is that one should consult a good man,

when one is in doubt as to good or evil deed, for, just as the swiftest horse
sometimes requires a whip and the sharpest knife a whetstone, so even the
wisest man needs counsel.112 As the genius of earth,113 Spandarmad rejoices
when the faithful cultivate waste land and rear cattle upon it, or when a
virtuous son is born upon it.114 But she is grieved when a robber or a tyrant
treads over her sacred face.115 Even as a mother carrying her dead child in
her bosom is in grief and sorrow, so does Spandarmad suffer when wicked
persons trample on her breast.116 The genius of earth trembles like a sheep
that sees a wolf, when the corpse of a wicked one is interred in her.117 When
a corpse is buried in the ground she is shocked, as when one discovers a
serpent or a scorpion in his bed.118 Even walking with bare foot upon the
ground injures her.119 Spandarmad's earth bears on her bosom high
mountains, and rivers and oceans; [366] tress and fodder and corn and fruit
grow upon her; men and animals thrive upon her. She yields nourishment
and prosperity unto all.120 The faithful who wish to propitiate her should
propitiate both the earth and virtuous women.121 108. Afrin-i Rapithwin;
Sitâyish-i Spandarmad in Pazand Texts, p. 99, 44.
109. Dk., vol. 9. p. 582.
110. Dd. 94. 2.
111. Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6. 78, p. 22.
112. SLS. 10. 27, 28; Sd. 85. 3.
113. BYt. 2.8. 16, 31,48, 53; SLS. 13, 14.
114. SLS. 15.24.
115. SLS. 15.22.
116. SLS. 15.23.
117. Sd. 65. 5.

118. Sd. 33.2.
119. Sd. 44, 1.
120. Afrin-i Rapithwin; Sitâyish-i Spandarmad in Pazend Texts, p. 99 244.
121. SLS. 15.20.
Spandarmad in the Pahlavi period takes up a new function which was not
hers in the earlier times. She becomes the guardian of virtuous women, as
intimated in the close of the preceding paragraph122 Whoever desires to
propitiate her, should propitiate the virtuous women;123 and through her
intervention men pray for noble wives.124 When a faithless wife of a
righteous husband has her abode on her earth, Spandarmad is in sore
distress125 She will rout her adversary Taromat at the Renovation.126
122. SLS. 15. 5.
123. SLS. 15.20.
124. SLS. 22. 5.
125. SLS. 15. 22.
126. Bd. 30.29.
KHURDAD
The giver of daily bread. He is the lord of the divisions of time, the years
and months and days, and it is through him that a good man lives an honest
and happy life during the year.127 On the material side this archangel has
water for his special care,128 and Zaratusht is commissioned by this archangel
to advocate good use of it in the world.129 As water gives fertility to the land
and is the source of prosperity, Khurdad is taken as the possession of plenty
and prosperity, and is invoked by the pious to bestow these gifts upon
mankind.130 The waters of Khurdad bring purity unto all. No living being can
live without this precious element. The earth of Spandarmad becomes fertile

owing to Khurdad's water; Amardad grows trees owing to his waters. Because
he spreads prosperity everywhere, 'prosperity' becomes his very name.131
Food and drink are his gifts.132 It is said that the daily bread which every one
obtains in this [367] world throughout a year is apportioned in the celestial
world on the day Khurdad of the first month of the Zoroastrian calendar and
the archangel intercedes in behalf of those who have propitiated Khurdad by
their deeds, and that these offerings thus secure for the faithful a large share
in this annual allotment of earthly riches.133 Those who make proper use of
water rejoice Khurdad and receive rewards in both worlds;134 but those who
are guilty of its misuse or defilement find their way to heaven blocked up by
the spirits that preside over water.135 In addition the Pahlavi writings record
that an unseasonable chatter and an immoderate drinking of wine distress
him.136 Khurdad will drive away his adversary, the demon Tairev, at the time
of Resurrection.137
127. Afrin-i Rapithwin in Pazand Texts, p. 99.
128. SLS. 9. 8; 13. 14; 15. 5.
129. Zsp. 22. 11.
130. SLS. 22. 6.
131. Afrin-i Rapithwin; Sitâyish-i Khurdâd in Pazend Texts, p. 99, 244.
132. Dk., vol. 7, p. 461.
133. Sd. 52.2,3.
134. SLS. 15.25,29.
135. SLS. 15. 27, 28.
136. Mkh. 2.33,34; 16.49,56.
137. Bd. 30. 29.

AMARDAD
Amardad's activity of guarding the vegetable kingdom. Ohrmazd wills that
man shall abstain from sin and practise goodness. Life devoted to goodness
in this world brings Amardad's happy reward to his soul in the next world.
After death the righteous soul goes to the all-happy Garotman of endless
light.138 This divinity works in the vegetable kingdom that belongs above all
to him,139 and helps those who work for the plant world.140 Food and drink
are in his care.141 Like his comrade Khurdad, Amardad refuses a passage to
heaven to those who sin against plants, and do not expiate the wrong.142 The
prophet is requested by him to enjoin rules for the preservation of plants.143
He will banish Zairich from the world in the final struggle.144
133. Sd. 52.2,3.
134. SLS. 15.25,29.
135. SLS. 15. 27, 28.
136. Mkh. 2.33,34; 16.49,56.
137. Bd. 30. 29.
138. Sitâyish-i Amardâd in Pazend Texts, p. 244.
139. Bd. 9. 2: Zsp. 8. 1; SLS. 9. 8; 13. 14; 15. 5.
140. SLS. 15.25, 29.
141. Dk., vol. 7, p. 461.
142. SLS. 15.27,28.
143. Zsp. 22. 12.
144. Bd. 30.29.

[368]
CHAPTER XL
IZADS
The angels. Izad is the Pahlavi equivalent of the Avestan word Yazata, and is
similarly employed as the designation for an angel. These angels are
immortal and invisible;1 and some of them, who were pre-eminently the
genii of the living in the Younger Avestan period, have by this time been
transferred more particularly to the sphere of the dead. For example, Srosh,
Rashn and Mihr, three of the most prominent Izads of the Avestan period,
have changed their sphere of activity. In the Avestan period they were the
genii exclusively of the corporeal world, but now they are converted into the
judges of the dead. In the Pahlavi time, the faithful, rather than looking to
them for protection and help in this world, solicit more especially their
favour for the next world. Srosh still retains some of his earthly functions,
but he becomes the genius of the dead first, and of the living afterwards. The
angels Hom and Din have extended their sphere of activity by joining
Tishtar in his work of producing rain.2 Certain qualities that were attributed
in the Avestan texts to one angel are now loosely ascribed to another.
1 Dk., vol. l, p.47; vol. 2, p.65, 66, 114.
2 Bd. 7.3; Zsp. 6.3; Dk., vol. 3, p.146.
The Izads are the loving guides and protectors of men. They first
expounded the faith of Ohrmazd to Gayomard, the primeval man;3 and they
are ever ready to fulfil the behests of Ohrmazd, who has created them for
the welfare of his creatures.4 They most frequently visit the sacred temples
consecrated to the fire Bahram.5 They help man,6 and instruct him in
goodness.7 It is through their aid that man learns to know God, to dispel
demons, and to liberate his soul from the future torments of [369] hell.8
Man's knowledge of them enables him to enter into relationship with his
creator;9 for he is unable to progress morally without their assistance.10 If
man remembers them, he receives their favour and prospers in both worlds.11

Through their wisdom, moreover, he becomes illustrious,12 and attains to
spiritual wealth through them.13 They hasten to help the man who practises
righteousness and abstains from wickedness;14 such a man wins their favour
by invoking them.15 It was for this very reason that the prophet Zaratusht
prayed to them to grant him the power of spiritual leadership.16 They keep
off Druj from the body of man, and guard him against the miseries of both
the Worlds.17 As a physician removes bodily illness, or as a farmer cleans
corn of all impurity, so do the angels remove harm from man.18 They keep
up this relation with man as long as he practises goodness, but they give up
his company when he falls into sinful habits.19 They lodge in the body of a
righteous person, causing him joy,20 and instruct the faithful in spiritual
matters;21 moreover, sin flees from him in whom they dwell.22 They help and
protect a pious man, even as a loving master would lead a calf to the pasture
land and prevent it from going to a place of harm.23 Like loving parents who
prohibit their children from partaking of some unwholesome food, the
angels prevent man, even against his will, from doing that which they
foresee, through their superior knowledge to be of eventual harm to him.24
Persons who befriend the righteous in this world find angels as their friends
in the next;25 the good leave name and fame here, and are blessed with the
company of the angels there.26
3 Dk., vol. 7, p.457.
4 Dk., vol. 3, p.170.
5 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.230,p.87.
6 Dk., vol. 1, p. 44, 45.
7 Mkh. 52.15.
8 Dk., vol. 2, p. 85.
9 Dk., vol. 2, p. 81.
10 Dk., vol. 4, p. 249.

11 Dk., vol. 7, p. 454.
12 Dk., vol. 7, p. 488.
13 Dk., vol. 7, p. 490.
14 Dk., vol. 2, p. 65.
15 Dk., vol. 7, p. 454.
16 Ib.
17 Dk., vol. 8, p. 475, 476.
18 Dk., vol. 1, p. 38, 49.
19 Dk., vol. 1, p. 26.
20 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6, 97, p. 12, 13; 236, p. 90, 91.
21 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 214, p. 79.
22 Dk., vol. 3, p. 153.
23 Dk., vol. 13, bk. 6. E. 1, p. 1.
24 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 222, p. 83.
25 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 133, p. 38, 39.
26 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 140, p. 41, 42.
Sacrificial offerings made to the angels. We have already seen that meat
formed a conspicuous article among the sacrificial gifts made to the heavenly
beings in the Avestan period. [370] Meat viands are the special feature of the

sacred feast during the Pahlavi period. The Pahlavi treatise Shayast-laShayast explains what particular parts of a slaughtered animal are to be
specifically dedicated to the various divinities in ceremonies. The angel
Hom's right to receive the tongue, jaw, and left eye, recognized by the
Avestan scriptures, remains still undisputed.27 The head and neck, shoulders
and thighs, loin and belly, kidneys and lungs, liver and spleen, legs and tail,
heart and entrails are all distributed among several different beings; until at
last the tail-bone falls to the lot of the august Farohar of Zaratusht, and the
great archangels have to content themselves merely with the residue.28
Decomposed meat is not to be consecrated to any angel;29 nor is any meat at
all to be used in any ceremony for the first three days after the death of a
person, but milk, cheese, fruit, eggs, and preserves are to be consecrated
instead.30 It is stated that if the relations of the deceased person were to
consecrate and eat fresh meat within three days after his death, another
death might perchance occur in the family.31 Yet on the fourth day they may
slaughter a goat or a sheep.32 A short formula is to be recited by the man
who slaughters this animal.33 It is desirable that the head of a slaughtered
animal should be consecrated before being eaten; but if it is not possible to
consecrate the head, one kidney at least must necessarily be consecrated.34
27 SLS. 11. 4, 6.
28 SLS. 11. 4.
29 SLS. 10. 34.
30 SLS. 17. 2; Sd. 78. 1.
31 Sd. 78.2.
32 SLS. 17.5.
33 Antia, Pazend Texts, p. 178.
34 Sd. 34.4-6.
In our treatment of the Izads individually, which we shall now undertake, we

shall deal only with those that are discussed at any great length in the
Pahlavi works.
SROSH
His activity. The whole earth, or more especially, Arzah and Savah, two of
the zones, are the abode of Srosh.35 Three times every night he comes to the
world.36 According to the Pahlavi texts, precisely as was recorded above for
the Avestan scriptures, the cock and dog are his associates in routing the
demons.37 He helps the man who in the midst of temptations [371] practises
virtue;38 for he makes his abode in the body of a righteous person; and the
man in whose body he is a guest becomes the more polite in his utterances of
welcome.39 Again we see Srosh inspiring an intelligent man to speak good
words, as also an unintelligent one who listens to the teachings of the highpriests.40 When the prophet child was thrown into the lair of a wolf for
destruction, Srosh and Vohuman brought a sheep with udder full of milk to
the den for the babe's nourishment.41 Srosh, likewise, escorted Viraf in his
journey to heaven above and to hell below; and at the time of the final
restoration of the world, Ohrmazd will depute him with Neryosangh to
arouse the sleeping hero Kersasp and fire him with the spirit to kill the
accursed Zohak.42 Srosh, in the final struggle between the angels and the
demons, will smite his adversary Eshm.43 He will then join in officiating with
Ohrmazd in celebrating, once and forever, the final destruction of evil.44 35
Mkh. 62.25.
36 SLS. 13.43.
37 Bd. 19.33.
38 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 90, p. 4, 5.
39 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6. 78, p. 21.
40 Dd. 3.14.
41 Zsp. 16.9; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.3.17, p. 39.

42 BYt. 3.59, 60.
43 Bd. 30.29; Mkh. 8.14.
44 Bd. 30.30.
A judge of the dead. Srosh is one of the judges who take accounts of the
souls of the dead at the Bridge of Judgment.45 If a man, during his lifetime,
performs the three nights ceremonies in honour of Srosh for the future
welfare of his soul, the angel will not forsake him for the first days after his
death.46 At the dawn of the fourth day after the death of a righteous person,
Srosh accordingly helps to conduct his soul across the bridge.47 Ceremonies
are therefore to be performed in honour of Srosh for the first three days and
nights after death, in order that this divine helper may protect the soul from
the attack of the demons during this period,48 and may serve in its favour at
the seat of judgment.49 Specially distinct praise and reverence are to be
bestowed upon Srosh, and even the names of the archangels should not be
associated with him.50 In addition, it may be noted, regarding Srosh's relation
to mankind, that when [372] children under seven years of age die, their
souls accompany in the hereafter those of their parents, to heaven or hell,
wherever the parents happen to be. On the other hand, invocation of Srosh
in the name of the child enables its soul to separate itself from those of its
parents.51
45 Dd. 14.4: 28.5; Mkh. 2.118.
46 Sd. 58.4, 7.
47 Mkh. 2.115, 124.
48 SLS. 17.3.
49 Dd. 28.6.
50 Dd. 29.2.

51 Sd. 47.1-3.
MIHR
Lord chief justice of the heavenly tribunal. Though retaining his
appellation of being the lord of wide pastures, Mihr (Av. Mithra) no longer
appears as a pastoral divinity; neither is he seen driving in his chariot to the
battlefield as a war angel. He has chosen a quieter realm of work, and now
occupies a seat in Ohrmazd's privy council in heaven. He administers justice
at the heavenly court, and is one of the celestial judiciaries that make up the
reckoning of good and evil deeds of the souls at the Bridge of Judgment.52 All
mankind has to appear before this lord of truth and justice.53 In his trial of
the dead, as the ancient divine personage presiding over truth, he exposes
those guilty of breach of promise.54 Great is the distress of every soul at the
Bridge, but Mihr saves those souls that have belonged to truth-speaking
persons.55 52 Dd. 31.11; Mkh. 2.118; Sd. 1.4, 18.16; 100.2: AV. 5; AnKhK.
5.
53 Gs. 169.
54 Dd. 14.3.
55 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.20.4, p. 210.
Morning time is the proper time for the ceremonials to be performed in
honour of Mihr;56 and the old idea has never been lost; that none should lie
unto him.57 That law remained ever supreme. 56 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.9.7,
p. 183, 184.
57 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.20.5, p. 210.
At the time of Renovation Mihr will help Peshyotan, who has lain asleep,
tradition repeats, from ancient times only to help in confounding the Evil
Spirit, who will flee back to the darkest recess of hell.58
58 BYt. 3.32-36.

RASHN
He holds the balance of judgment in the celestial court. This Izad of the
Avesta, who traversed all earthly regions and presided at the ordeals, in
regard to mankind, is transferred in [373] the texts of the Pahlavi period to
the celestial world. As genius of truth, Rashn now sits in the heavenly
tribunal for judging the souls of the dead.59 He holds in his hands the golden
balance and weighs the good and evil deeds of the souls.60 59 Dd. 14.4;
31.11; Sd. 1.4; 18.16; 58.5: 100.2; Dk., vol. 5, p. 280. 281; AnKhK. 5.
60 Mkh. 2.118, 119; AV. 5. 5.
A sacred cake is consecrated to Rashn as an angel, on the dawn of the fourth
day after the death of a person,61 The proper period to commemorate him is
at dawn.62
61 Dd. 30.2; SLS. 17.4.
62 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.9.6, p. 183.
KHURSHED
The sun. The entire creation of Ohrmazd longs for the rising of the sun in
order to escape the brood of darkness, the demons and fiends, sorcerers and
wolves, noxious creatures of hell, the wicked and the hordes. The faithful
pray that the resplendent sun may continue to shine from its loftiest position,
for it is due to its light that the earth created by Ohrmazd exists, the creation
does not die owing to excessive cold, the fruits of trees gain life and
sweetness and the earthly creation gains help and protection and growth.
The prayer concludes with a pious wish that the sun may shine with greater
glory and greater brilliance and be a more beneficent host to the earth
created by Ohrmazd.63
63 Sitâyish-i Khurshed in Pazend Texts, p. 252, 253.
Khurshed's message to mankind. Man should invoke this personification of
the sun three times every day. He should completely resign himself to

Ohrmazd, and expiate his sins; he should also daily interrogate his own self
as to whether he has lived that day in the pious service of Ohrmazd or in the
accursed bondage of Ahriman.64 Khurshed delivers three messages of
Ohrmazd every day to mankind. In the first, or the message of the morning,
Ohrmazd desires that mankind be zealous in doing meritorious deeds, so
that, by Ohrmazd himself, their condition in this world may be made better.
Secondly, at noon, men are reminded to marry and have children; and are
likewise exhorted to co-operate with each other in doing good deeds that
will prevent Ahriman and his brood from freeing themselves out of bondage
until the day of resurrection. In the third, or evening [374] message, mankind
are reminded to repent of sins they may have unconsciously committed as in
that case they would be forgiven.65 One should reverence the sun during the
day, for not to do so is sin.66 It is proper to invoke it even if it is not visible
owing to cloudiness;67 otherwise by not thus reverencing it, the good works
that a man does that day lose their value for him.68
64 Dk., vol. 11. bk. 6. 227, p. 86.
65 Gs. 154-157.
66 SLS. 7.1, 3.
67 Ib., 5.
68 SLS. 7.6.
TISHTAR
He retains his position as the genius of rain. The Pahlavi writers reproduce
the account of Tishtar's fight with Aposh from the Avestan Yasht 8, which
celebrates his work.69 The Yasht spoke of the help that Ohrmazd gave
Tishtar when he was routed in his first combat with his adversary and
invoked the Supreme Being for help and strength. The Dadistan adds that
besides Ohrmazd the archangels and the guardian spirits also carried help to
him.70 Vohuman, Ardvisur, Vat, Hom, and Din are spoken of as his
associates.71 Tishtar seizes rain water from the ocean,72 carries seeds of plants
with it and scatters them all over the world. This angel of rain removes the

hot winds that parch the dry lands and spreads prosperity all around by
means of his fertilizing waters. 69 Bd. 7.3-10; Zsp 6.3, 4, 9-11, 13.
70 93. 13.
71 Dk., vol. 3, p. 146.
72 Mkh. 62. 41, 42.
Ohrmazd has created the glorious Tishtar, the giver of profit and prosperity,
the maker of rain for the help of the stars that further the creation of
Ohrmazd. He is invoked to further the growth of trees and plants upon the
seven Zones by abundant rain to prevent the harm that the Evil Spirit and
his infernal crew bring upon earth.73
73 Sitâyish-i Tishtar in Pazend Texts, p. 254, 255.
[375]
CHAPTER XLI
FAROHARS
The Farohars have existed long before the world came into being. Farohar,
or Fravahar, is the Pahlavi form of the Avestan Fravashi. The Pahlavi works
do not speak of the Farohars of Ohrmazd and his heavenly ministers; in the
writings of this period, the Farohars are confined to the earthly creatures.
Every single good creature of this world has its own Farohar.1 Ohrmazd
created them long before he brought the universe into existence; and they
actively worked by the creator's side, when he fortified the sky against the
attacks of Ahriman. Mounted on horses and with spears in hands they
patrolled the boundaries of the rampart of heaven.2 At the beginning of the
world Zaratusht's Farohar was shown to Goshorun to console her that in the
fullness of time the prophet would be sent to the world to remove the
inequity that was rampant on earth.3
1 Mkh. 49. 23.

2 Bd. 6.3; Zsp. 5. 2.
3 Bd. 4.4.
They volunteer to descend to earth and stand by men to the end of their
lives. From the beginning of time the Farohars lived in supreme felicity in
the empyrean realm, along with Ohrmazd and his heavenly host.4 When
Ohrmazd created man, as the climax and crown of his earthly creation, the
deity asked these spiritual intelligences whether they would wish to stay in
heaven under his constant protection, or migrate to earth in human bodies
and encounter the foe, fight with him valiantly, vanquish him in the flesh
and return triumphant to God for the eternal reward. The Farohars accepted
the latter alternative, and prepared themselves to face the attack of
Ahriman.5 Thus the Farohars, who were seated in heaven and were conscious
of the beatific vision of Ohrmazd, prefer the voluntary exile for a time in the
world of joy and sorrow, of good and evil, in order to win forever the
uninterrupted bliss of heaven. Thus it is, [376] that they tenant human
bodies and temporarily adopt the material vehicles for the express purpose of
routing evil and redeeming the world from its imperfection.
4 Dk., vol. 2, p. 80.
5 Bd. 2.10,11.
In the Pahlavi period their influence is less prominent. In the Pahlavi texts
the Farohars are represented as entrusted with the work of guarding the soul
of Sam,6 and the Hom tree of immortality,7 as well as the passage of hell.8
Ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine of them watch over
Zaratusht's seed, which will give birth to the three saviour renovators of the
world in the last three millenniums.9 As a part of their office also they help
and keep pure the elements and the sun, moon, and stars;10 and they preserve
the breath of life and energy of the body in men,11 and keep the bodily
organs in unison.12 6 Bd. 29. 8; Mkh. 62.23, 24.
7 Mkh. 62.28, 29.

8 Mkh. 49.15, 16.
9 Bd. 32.8, 9.
10 Dk., vol. 8, p. 446.
11 Dk., vol. 6, p. 353.
12 Dk., vol. 6, p. 409.
The zeal with which they were approached by the living in the Avestan
period has considerably abated by this time. The faithful no longer invoke
them for various boons as zealously as their forebears did. The fighting
armies do not call upon them for help in the thick of battles. Men do not
look to them for riches and plenty; and women do not turn their eager eyes
to them for easy childbirth. Their hold on humanity is weakened, and they
are less in touch with the daily lives of men than before. One of the later
Pahlavi works divests the Farohars of their spirituality, and identifies them
with the stars.13 The Farohars of the renovators are spoken of as created from
the body of the first man.14
13 Mkh. 49.22.
14 Mkh. 27.17.
In is for the welfare of the living that the Farohars solicit sacrifices. It is the
sacred duty of the faithful to commemorate the Farohars of the dead,
especially on the days set apart for that purpose.15 The Farvardigan festival
was a national institution, and the kings and people zealously observed it. A
Byzantine ambassador on his way to Persia in 565 was prevented [377] from
entering the city of Nisibis for ten days while this festival was celebrated
there.16 On the fourth day after death the Farohar of the departed one in a
family is to be invoked along with the Farohars of all righteous persons that
have lived in this world from the time of the first man on earth, and also of
those that will live up to the advent of the renovator of the world.17 When

thus invoked in prayer the Farohars come down to attend the ceremonies;18
but if they are not properly propitiated, they wander disconsolate about their
former abodes for a time and finally depart leaving their curse. Such a curse
is irrevocable, if once given, unless nullified by the Farohars who uttered it.
15 SLS. 10.2; 12.31.
16 Menander Protector, ed. Niebuhr, p. 374, Bonn, 1829.
17 SLS. 17.5; Dd. 28.7; 81.15.
18 SLS. 9.11, 12.
Besides, it is not for their own good that the Farohars seek invocation,
because they do not need any ceremony for their own sake; their coming,
rather, is to remind the householder of the life after death, to warn him that
he also will one day have to leave this world, and that when trouble comes
upon him they could not help him, if he neglected them.19 Yet, if well
propitiated by the survivors of the deceased, they escort the souls of these
persons, when their turn of death comes. They intercede on their behalf,
give a good report to Ohrmazd, and entreat him to give them due reward.20
But if the living have neglected them, and have failed to sacrifice unto them,
they depart cursing, and bide their time, until the day when death brings the
survivors to the Bridge of Judgment. To such souls, stepping on the
threshold of the next world, they utter reproaches and refuse help.21 19 SLS.
9.13; Sd. 13.6-9.
20 Sd. 37.6-8.
21 Sd. 37.10-12.
The line of distinction between the souls and the Farohars of the dead is
gradually obliterated in the Pahlavi texts. By the end of the Pahlavi period
both of these spiritual faculties, namely, the soul and the Farohar, are
invoked to come down upon earth. The Pahlavi texts, accordingly, speak of
the souls or of the Farohars, as the case may be, as coming to this world on
the days originally dedicated to the latter. The Avestan texts, on the other

hand, always spoke of the advent of the Farohars (not of the souls) to this
world on the festival days consecrated [378] to them at the end of every
year, but the Pahlavi works expressly speak of the souls descending to the
earth on these days, as well as on the anniversaries of their bodily death.22 A
passage speaks of the souls as coming on their anniversaries accompanied by
nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine Farohars from heaven as their
guests, just as men do on earth.23
22 Phl. Vd. 8.22; Sd. 37.1-12.
23 Sd. 13.3.
[379]
CHAPTER XLII
PRAYERS AND RITUALS
Pazend prayers. When the Sasanians came to power, the Avesta, the sacred
language of Zoroastrianism, has ceased to be a living tongue. The daily
prayers continued to be recited in the dead language. The need was
evidently felt to supplement the Avestan prayers by some additional prayers
in the vernacular. Dastur Adarbad Mahraspand, the learned high-priest and
premier of King Shapur II, composed such supplementary prayers in Pazend,
and his example was followed by other Dasturs. Several benedictory,
thanksgiving, and expiatory prayers composed during this period have come
down to us and are recited as supplementary prayers to the Avestan prayers
to the present day. The composers take the original Avestan prayers as the
source of their inspiration. Short Avestan formulas or sentences are often
rendered word for word in Pazend. The Pazend version of the Avestan
confessional prayer frastuye,1 for example, forms the opening part of the Patit.
Besides thus reproducing the Avestan passages in Pazend, independent
prayers, preserving the spirit and sentiment of the Avesta, are composed in
praise of Ohrmazd, Amshaspands, and Izads, presiding over the thirty days
of the month. The original Avestan wedding hymn has not come down to us.
What has reached us is a Pazend hymn, composed during the Sasanian
period, embodying three Avestan passages.2 The important Pazend prayers

that are extant consist of the Afrins, Sitayishes, Patits, Nirangs, the
introductory and closing parts of the Avestan Nyaishes and Yashts, and
several devotional pieces of considerable beauty.
1 Ys. 11.17.
2 Ys. 54.1; 59.30, 31.
Supplicatory prayers. The worshipper extols Ohrmazd as the eternal,
omnipotent, and beneficent lord and asks him to exalt his thoughts and lead
him to goodness and happiness in accordance with his divine will. The
devotee sees none besides [380] Ohrmazd, he is his only hope. He,
therefore, beseeches him to protect and help him.3 His is greatness and his is
glory, he who is the creator, protector, and liberator of all. The faithful
implore him to give holiness and happiness unto all and bestow upon them
reward for their good deeds from his Treasury of Eternal Weal. The faithful
ask him to liberate them from the tyranny of the wicked, to help the
helpless, to bring comfort to those that are in trouble. He alone, they
acknowledge, is the source of protection and help to all and is the one who
redresses the wrongs of all.4 The angel presiding over the moon is asked to
give ease and health, and the fulfillment of right wishes, joy, well-being, and
fearlessness.5 The faithful pray that they may be exalted in both the worlds,
and may have health and long life, name and fame, wealth and happiness.
Their fervent prayer is that no harm and distress should come upon them
from Ahriman, the jealous, the envious, the malicious, the unjust, and the
wicked; on the contrary all evil that the wicked conspire by thought and
word and deed to do unto them may recoil upon their own persons.6
3 Sitâyish-i Depâdar in Pazend Texts, p. 250.
4 Sitâyish-i Depmihr in Pazend Texts, p. 257.
5 Sitâyish-i Mâh in Pazend Texts, p. 254.
6 Sipâs-i Akenâreh in Pazend Texts, p. 211, 212.

Thanksgiving prayers. The worshipper says unto Ohrmazd, that a thousand
times daily he offers him thanks through his thoughts, words, and deeds, for
he has created him as an Aryan and of the good religion, and has given him
eyes and ears and hands and feet and intelligence and reason and still gives
food and garments.7 He offers his praise and remembers him by his name day
and night in heartfelt thanksgiving that he has created him as man and
endowed him with speech.8
7 Namâz-i Dâdâr Ohrmazd in Pazend Texts, p. 206.
8 Sitâyish-i Depâdar in Pazend Texts, p. 250.
Benedictory prayers. The devout pray that the good co-religionists of Iran
and the seven zones be the promoters of the faith, doers of the deeds of
merit, and abjurers of sin. May their wishes pertaining to the bodily life in
this world and those regarding the soul in the next world be realized.9 May
there be prosperity and greatness unto all, and may joy and health come
unto the houses of the good. May the heavens shower good and may the
earth grow good crops and the good reap the reward [381] of their goodness
everywhere.10 May the Izads bring prosperity and joyous and happy life of
150 years unto the worshippers of Mazda and may the knowledge and
renown and glory of the good Mazda-worshipping religion spread over the
seven zones.11 May joy and pleasure and goodness come unto all from the
south and may sickness and trouble and harm flee towards the north. May he
get more who needs more. May good come unto him who deserves good.
May he get a wife who longs for a wife. May he be blessed with a child who
prays for a child. May the good Mazda-worshipping religion spread over the
seven zones and live.12 9 Ba Nâm-i Khâvar in Pâzend Texts, p. 213.
10 Afrin-i Rapithwin in Pazend Texts, p. 100.
11. Afrin-i Gahanbâr Châshni in Pazend Texts, p. 105, 106.
12. Afrin-i haft Amshâspand in Pazend Texts, p. 89.
While showering their blessings on the occasion of a wedding, the priests

wish the bride and the groom the special virtues, qualities, and
characteristics possessed by Ohrmazd, Amshaspands, Izads, Zaratusht, kings,
heroes, wise men, Time, sun, moon, stars, earth, water, fire, river, winter,
spring, gold, musk, amber, wine, myrtle, jasmine, sweet marjoram, basil and
other good objects.
Confessional prayers. The worshipper confesses that he accepts the religion
that Ohrmazd taught Zaratusht and Zaratusht taught Gushtasp and which
Adarbad Mahraspand purified and organized. Unto the end of his life, he
says, he will adhere to the good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and
will embrace the deeds of merit and discard sinful deeds.13 He avows his faith
in Ohrmazd and Amshaspands, and believes in heaven and hell, resurrection
and renovation. Good thoughts, good words and good deeds he accepts and
evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds he renounces.14 At the ceremony of
investing a child with the sacred shirt and girdle, it is made to recite the
Pazend formula of the Confession of Faith in which it says that the good and
true religion is sent by God upon earth and Zaratusht has brought it. Such is
the religion of Ohrmazd and Zaratusht that it accepts.
13 Patit-i Pashimâni in Pazend Texts, p. 123, 124.
14 Ba nâm-i Izad in Pâzend Texts, p. 208.
Penitential prayers. There are four Pazend Patits extant, called Patit-i
Pashimâni, Patit-i Khud, Patit-i Irânik, and Patit-i Vidardakân. A short expiatory
prayer included in the Kusti formula is recited by every Zoroastrian as many
times a day as [382]he or she unties and ties the sacred girdle round the
waist. It also forms part of the introduction to the Nyaishes, Yashts and other
prayers. The individual here repents and turns back from all sins which he
may have committed knowingly or unknowingly, actually committed or
merely contemplated, sins pertaining to thought or word or deed, body or
soul, and in this world or the next. In the Patit the faithful enumerate all sins
of commission and omission, which have been recognized as sins by
Ohrmazd and which have been accepted as such by those of the early faith
and say that they repent in the presence of Ohrmazd and the Amshaspands
and before Mihr, Srosh, Rashn, Fire, Barsam, Hom, Din, before their own

souls, before a Dastur or any righteous person and turn back from them with
penitence.15 The penitent prays that whatever was the will of Ohrmazd
according to which he should have thought, but had not thought: according
to which he should have spoken, but had not spoken: and according to
which he should have done, but had not done-of all these sins he repents.
He further repents of the thoughts, words, and deeds which were after the
will of Ahriman and which he should have abstained from and yet he had
failed to do so.16
15 Patit-i Pashimâni in Pazend Texts, p. 120, 121, 128.
16 Ib., p. 121.
Intercessory prayers and rituals. The Gathic ideal that each individual reaps
as he sows and one's own good thoughts, good words, and good deeds form
the only means of salvation is gradually weakened. Prayers recited by others
and rituals performed by the living for the dead are believed to help those in
whose memory they are celebrated. The man who feels death approaching
orders that those around him may recite Ashem Vohu and Patit when his
death is imminent, he wishes and orders that his children may recite
expiatory prayers for him after his death and may celebrate Srosh and
Getofarid ceremonies.17 17 Patit-i PashimAni in Pazend Texts, p. 124.
The sacrificer prays that the offerings he makes to the soul to whom this day
is sacred, may reach it for its betterment and may the deeds of merit that he
performs in behalf of the soul, enable it to advance to a more exalted place,
may it win liberation from the clutches of the demons and fiends, and may it
[383] enter Garotman, the perfect abode of Ohrmazd, Amshaspands, and the
righteous dead, and may Vohuman rise from his golden throne and bestow
upon the soul resplendent, golden garments.18
18 Afrin-i Ardâfarvash in Pazend Texts,p. 84, 85.
The Nirangs. The Avestan mânthra, Pahlavi mânsar, 'spell,' has nirang, for its
Pazend equivalent. Several such formulas, often embodying Avestan
passages, are composed in Pazend, to be recited to obtain various results.

They are used to deprecate evil, to rout the malignant demons of disease, to
remove barrenness in women, to ward off the fear of thieves and robbers, to
put down sorcery and witchcraft, to preserve a child from the evil eye, to
exorcise persons possessed of ghosts and goblins, to cure all kinds of sickness
and to accomplish various other purposes. Charms inscribed with such spells
and tied on the left hand of a child made it wise and dutiful. The same tied
on the left hand of a refractory wife brought her on her knees before her
husband. The faithful are believed to gain health and wealth and children
and the good-will of great persons in this world and divine grace in the next
world by the recital of these formulas.
The merit of prayers, rituals, and good deeds stored in the Place of
Eternal Weal. We saw in the Gathas that the faithful prayed that their
devotion and homage be placed in the Garonmana. The Avestan texts spoke
of a place called misvâna gâtu, 'the place of mixing,' without giving any
information about it. The Pahlavi and Pazend works call it hameshak sut gâs,
'the Place of Eternal Weal.' It is situated in the Endless Light of heaven.19 It is
the place where unbounded joy prevails.20 19 Dd. 37.24.
20 Ib., 31.24; 37.22.
It is here that the good works of supererogation and the merit of prayers and
rituals are stored in a treasury for the benefit of the souls whose credit is
found to be inadequate at the Bridge of Judgment.21 The Pazend texts call it:
Ganj-i Dâdâr Ohrmazd 'the Treasury of the Creator Ohrmazd,' Ganj-i Yazatân,
'the Treasury of the Angels,' or Ganj-i hamisha sud, 'the Treasury of Eternal
Weal.'22
21 Phl. Vd. 19.36; SLS. 8.4; Dd. 26.3.
22 Afrin-i Ardâfarvash, Afrin-i Gahanbâr, Afrin-i Rapithwin, Afrin-i Gahanbâr
Châshni, Sitâyish-i Depmihr in Pazend Texts, p. 83, 91, 100, 106, 257; SLS. 8.4.

[384]
CHAPTER XLIII
EVIL
Independent origin of evil. The sharp antithesis of the Avestan period
between good and evil is still further intensified by the Pahlavi writers. In
fact dualism reaches its consummation in this period. It is the standard
philosophy, and is upheld as the only possible solution of the problem of
evil. The author of the Shikand Gumanik Vijar, who is himself a dualist of
the most pronounced kind, strongly urges in his polemics against other
religions that good and evil can on no account have originated from one and
the same source. Evil is considered to have as independent and complete an
existence as good; they are both primeval. They are so entirely separate from
each other that neither good originates from evil, nor evil from good.1 Each
one of them exists by itself, and entertains perpetual antagonism towards the
other.2 The pairs of opposites such as heat and cold, perfume and stench,
pleasure and pain, health and sickness, life and death, and all others fall
under the compass of these fundamental terms, good and evil.3 This dualism
between good and evil in the moral realm is the same as that between light
and darkness in the physical world. Right is identified with light, and wrong
with darkness. There has never been anything in the World which is not
either good or evil or a mixture of both.4 Besides, in all periods, evil is found
to be stronger than goodness.5 The nature of divinity is light and beauty,
fragrance and purity, goodness and wisdom; for darkness and ugliness,
stench and pollution, evil and ignorance are outside of his nature.6 Ohrmazd
is not responsible for this imperfect side of existence.
1 Sg. 8. 89, 102.
2 Ib., 90, 91.
3 Ib., 92-99, 101.
4 Ib., 100; 11.158.

5 Ib., 11. 97.
6 Ib., 319, 320.
Tracing both good and evil to God deprives him of his divinity. It seems
that the dualistic system is criticized by the non-Zoroastrian critics as
detracting from the grandeur of the [385] godhead;7 but the author of this
treatise retorts by arguing at length that the indispensable attributes of God
such as his goodness, omniscience, omnipotence, and the rest, demand that
he could not simultaneously be the producer of good and of evil. If evil is
also his creation, God is either not wholly good or he is not wholly
powerful; both good and evil cannot be dependent on his will. The
controversialist continues by addressing arguments to prove that Ohrmazd
cannot be held accountable for evil without impairing some one or more of
his attributes that are essential to his divinity; and whatever reflects upon
even a single of his divine attributes degrades his position. We shall now see
the main arguments advanced by the learned controversialist against the
theory of tracing both good and evil to one and the Same source.
7 Sg. 12.33, 34.
The goodness of Ohrmazd demands that he could on no account be the
author of evil. One of the essential requisites of the godhead is goodness. If
evil arises from him as the deity, he is imperfect in goodness, and
consequently could not be deserving of praise and sacrifice from men.8 Men
cannot pray to one who is partly good and partly evil. If the divine being
could have averted evil from mankind, and did not so will it, he is not perfect
in goodness; and a being that is imperfect in goodness is not to be glorified
by men.9 If he is perfect in goodness, he could not wish for the presence of
evil, but only for its extinction;10 for a being whose will is evil is unworthy of
his divinity.11 Such a view destroys his attribute of goodness. But Ohrmazd is
perfect in goodness;12 and consequently, his will being eternally good, only
goodness should prevail in the world from its beginning up to its end.13 But,
the author maintains, the world shows more of evil than goodness,14 hence
evil is outside of and independent of Ohrmazd. Beside all that, everything in
the world either happens through his will, or it does not, or there may be

some things that happen through his will, and others through the Will of
some other.15 If both the good and evil come to pass through his will, then
his will is not perfect,16 and the being whose will is imperfect is himself [386]
imperfect.17 If nothing proceeds through his will, he works automatically and
is therefore made by some one,18 but this is unthinkable. If some things are
through his will and others through the will of some other being, God either
ordains the existence of the good or the evil, for there is nothing in the
world which is not the result of either of the two. If God wills good, some
one else wills evil, or if he wills evil, some other being wills good.19 Hence a
power that personifies the opposing will exists,20 and since God is goodnees,
the evil in the world proceeds through the will of the rival spirit, who exists
independent of the good spirit. 8 Ib., 11.103-111.
9 Ib., 280-284, 315.
10 Ib., 11.311.
11 Ib., 35.
12 Zsp. 1.17.
13 Sg. 11.339-342.
14 Ib., 36, 343.
15 Ib., 155-157.
16 Ib., 125-132, 159-162, 344-351.
17 Ib., 162.
18 Sg. 164-167.
19 Ib., 168-175.
20 Ib., 176.

If it is argued that Ohrmazd has created evil for the reason that mankind may
better understand and appreciate goodness; or again, that he has created
poverty, pain, and death that human beings may better understand the value
of wealth, health, and life, and consequently become more grateful to God,
it is as unreasonable as saying that the Deity gives poison to mankind so that
they may better understand and appreciate the value of the antidote.21 In
another place, however, it is said in the Pahlavi texts that Ohrmazd allows
Ahriman, the father of evil, to commingle with his creation for an allotted
period for the experience and training of mankind.22
21 Ib., 11. 197-204.
22 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 5.7, p. 8.
The all-wise God would not create his own adversary. Omniscience is one
of the attributes requisite for divinity;23 and in the Pahlavi period Ohrmazd is
always spoken of as omniscient.24 If it is maintained that both good and evil
proceed from Ohrmazd himself, the question then arises why he being
omniscient, should have foreseen the harm that would be caused to his
creation, and yet not have found it inexpedient to create, through his own
will, a perverse creature that would turn out to be his adversary and cause
him perpetual anxiety and sorrow.25 If he did not foresee the evil
consequences, he is not omniscient.26 If he created this eternal foe to man for
the sake of experiment, without knowing the result, then such a being is
making experiments at the painful cost of the miseries of the countless generations of mankind, and is consequently not omniscient.27 23 Sg. 11.13.
24 Ib., 12.52.
25 Ib., 11.93, 94.
26 Ib., 9.
27 Ib., 115-117.

[387] Again it is meaningless for the wise one who is contented with his own
divinity and grandeur to have produced through his own knowledge and will
an enemy of mankind, who causes them misery in this and the next world.28
A wise person always acts with a view to the good of all, and does not
contemplate evil. Now evil abounds in the world. If the Lord has created
Ahriman, who does good neither to him nor to his creatures, but positive
harm to all, then this creative act of Ohrmazd is unwise.29 Again if God does
not know the means to avert evil, he is equally unwise,30 and an unwise God
is imperfect.31 But Ohrmazd is perfect in wisdom, and knows how to
eradicate evil,32 which he has not created.
28 Sg. 11.27-29.
29 Ib., 11.330-338.
30 Ib., 314.
31 Ib., 317.
32 Ib., 310.
Omnipotent Ohrmazd has not created evil. One of the indispensable
attributes of God is omnipotence;33 and the divinity of the Deity without this
quality would be incomplete.34 The independent existence of a rival spirit,
which the theologians of this period so zealously maintain, is in no way
considered to diminish the power and grandeur of God.35 Inasmuch as the
ultimate victory rests with the Good Spirit, and goodness is to rout evil at
the end of time, the omnipotence of Ohrmazd is not considered to be
impaired. It is emphasized in Pahlavi literature that Ohrmazd, who is
omnipotent,36 would on no account be the author of evil.37 If he desired to
prevent evil, but could not do so, he is impotent. The omnipotent being
must be capable of performing his own will, for otherwise mankind would
not adore him as the almighty Lord.38 If he is thus capable of performing his
will, and if at the same time his will is always for good and never for evil, it
should come to pass that the avoidance of sin, the shunning of the path to
hell, and the striving to be worthy of heaven would be manifest among all

mankind according to God's will.39 But this is not the case.40 If the Deity is
capable of performing his will, and yet does not do it, he is unmerciful and of
inconstant will.41 33 Ib., 11.13.
34 Ib., 15, 16.
35 Ib., 33,34.
36 Ib., 12. 52.
37 Ib., 11.312.
38 Ib., 288-294.
39 Ib., 295-297.
40 Ib., 298.
41 Ib., 299, 300.
Again, if the rival spirit did not exist, and if evil did not originate from him,
the omnipotent creator ought to have created [388] his creatures without
blemish.42 His mercifulness and omniscience would have demanded this from
him.43 42 Ib., 118.
43 Ib., 119-124.
If it is said that the adversary was created originally good by Ohrmazd, from
whom he afterwards revolted and became evil, then it shows that the
adversary possesses a more powerful will than that of the sacred being, since
in that event the power of evil is thus able to break his commandment and
diffuse more harm in the world than the good of the sacred being.44 Furthermore, Ohrmazd, as the almighty being, should not have created an opponent
who in the long run, by deluding and misleading mankind, threatened to
become triumphant over him.45 In addition, as the omniscient being, the
Deity should have foreseen the consequences and not have produced a rebel

for whose existence he would have to be sorry.46 Moreover, the Evil Spirit
should not, under these circumstances, be unreasonably blamed, since he has
been created of so headstrong a will by God;47 on the contrary, the Good
Spirit who has created him of such perverse nature should be held
accountable for the mischief that the Evil One is now doing in the world.48
44 Ib., 51,95-97.
45 Ib., 85-87.
46 Ib., 88-94.
47 Ib., 245-251.
48 Ib., 257, 258.
If it is maintained that Ohrmazd has created disease and misfortune to give
an opportunity to mankind-an opportunity to practise the virtue of
mitigating these evils, and thus to be finally rewarded by eternal happiness-it
means that he is not actually able to bestow happiness upon the virtuous,
except by causing distress to others.49 Again, to say that he will give
recompense to the sick and needy, who have undeservedly suffered in this
world, would reflect upon the Good Spirit;50 for it shows that it was
impossible for him to give these unfortunate people happiness in heaven,
without first causing them misery in this world.51 This after-nobility of
rewarding after harassing does no credit to the Almighty One.52 But, the
argument continues, Ohrmazd has neither created Ahriman nor his evil. 49
Ib., 141-148.
50 Ib., 149.
51 Ib., 150.
52 Ib., 151-154.
From the trend of his argument we might be led to think that our author thus
prefers to limit the omnipotence of Ohrmazd rather than ascribe to him the

authorship of evil. But his contention is that inasmuch as Ahriman, who is
independent in his origin, will ultimately bow the knee before Ohrmazd and
[389] perish at his hands, the omnipotence of the Good Spirit may be
considered to be intact.
Ohrmazd, the sovereign ruler, would not harass his earthly subjects by the
creation of evil. If the divine being who is the eternal sovereign53 keeps out
distress, oppression, injustice from the world, and routs the enemies that
threaten the peace and security of mankind, he is worthy of his divinity,54
but if he rules as a tyrant occasioning eternal distress to mankind, he is
unworthy of his divinity.55 His title to divinity further demands that he
cannot be a good and a bad sovereign, causing happiness as well as misery
unto mankind, for that would make him of a mixed individuality.56 53 Sg. 12.
52.
54 Ib., 11.17-19, 222, 227-232.
55 Ib., 233-238.
56 Ib., 225, 226, 239-244.
Again, he could not produce evil to injure his own creatures, unless he ceases
to be their friend and turns out their enemy.57 But the creator is the friend of
creation and not its enemy. He is its best ruler. Evil is introduced into his
earthly kingdom by an infernal sovereign who struggles to found the
Kingdom of Wickedness on earth.
57 Ib., 217-221, 252.
Unmerited harm could not emanate from a just God. Ohrmazd is just, and
administers justice with exactitude unto all. Now, if he is the author of evil,
crime, and sin, there is no justice in his thus creating these and then
enjoining that mankind shall abstain from committing them, under penalty
of incurring punishment.58 Ohrmazd, the writer continues, is the emblem of
truth and justice even as Ahriman is the embodiment of falsehood and
injustice. It is, therefore, inconsistent for a true and just being to say, on the

one hand, that he hates sin and sinners, and on the other hand to produce
more sin and sinners than good deeds and doers of good deeds.59 It is not
justice, moreover, to inflict unlimited punishment for a limited sin, and to
cause perpetual pain and distress to his creatures for indulging in the evil
which he has himself produced.60 But Ohrmazd is the embodiment of justice,
whereas the existence of evil is a glaring injustice to innocent humanity.
Hence evil, the writer concludes, is the creation of an unjust power, that is,
of Ahriman.
58 Sg. 11.109, 110, 125-132, 260-263.
59 Ib., 11.30-33.
60 Ib., 12.41-50.
God, the embodiment of mercy, could not inflict evil upon his own
creatures. One of the essential traits of Ohrmazd is [390] his mercifulness.61
If, then, he is merciful, why should he knowingly permit Ahriman to
introduce misery and harm among his own creatures.62 Mankind, even with
their little knowledge, would never, of their own accord, allow the lion, the
wolf, and other noxious creatures in among their young ones; why has the
Lord, who is called merciful, let in Ahriman and his ribald crew of demons
upon his own creation.63 If he is capable of removing evil and yet does not
do so, but, on the contrary, curses those who adhere to evil and casts them
away for punishment in hell, he is not merciful.64 Where is his divine mercy
in fathering such a world of woe and sorrow. 61 Ib., 11.13.
62 Sg. 11.8.
63 Ib., 11.111-114.
64 Ib., 121-124, 300.
Again, as a wise being Ohrmazd acts for some purpose when he creates the
universe, for to act without a purpose is not worthy of the all-wise lord.65 If
he has, then, created the world for his own pleasure and for the happiness of

mankind, as religion claims, why should he ever indulge in their slaughter
and devastation.66 But this is not true, for Ohrmazd is merciful and he does
not slaughter, nor devastate, nor wish evil to his creatures; evil is, therefore,
not of his making, but of some other merciless being.67 Such is the view
maintained in the treatise.
65 Ib., 103-105.
66 Ib., 106-108.
67 Ib., 12.56.
It is deemed futile to attempt to resolve Ahriman into a symbolic
personification of man's evil nature. To those who put forth the theory that
evil springs from the nature of mans our author asks whether it had its origin
before the creation of mankind or at the same time with man.68 If evil arose
before man, he says, it must either have been created by God, or it had its
independent existence.69 If it arose after mankind through man's own
making, that is, through the freedom of his own will, it means that man
originated it in defiance of the imperfect will of his own creator.70 This is
setting up the will of man in opposition to the will of Ohrmazd. Now the
sinners, among mankind are punished by Ohrmazd. His omnipotence and
mercifulness demand that he should not have thus allowed men to sin, when
he wanted to punish them afterwards for having committed sin.71 If evil
originates with mankind, because mankind are created by God, then the
creator is responsible, for the production of evil.72 68 Ib., 11.177-179.
69 Ib., 180-182.
70 Ib., 183-191.
71 Ib., 192-196.
72 Ib., 258.
[391] It is further explained, in the same Pahlavi tractate, that if from

outward appearance it seems that good and evil alike spring from mankind it
is because mankind are not perfect in goodness.73 As sickness and death are
due to the bodily imperfection of man, so does evil originate owing to his
moral imperfection.74 The two competing propensities existing in human
nature cause these imperfections.75 73 Sg. 8. 117,118.
74 Ib., 119-122.
75 Ib., 123.
Whence this evil propensity in the nature of man? Does it originate with
him? Does man load the infirmities of the flesh and the inequities of his
moral nature on the back of Ahriman and proclaim him as the source of all
evil? If so, why circumscribe Ohrmazd's greatness by postulating this
imaginary creature? But the general verdict of the Pahlavi writers is that evil
is primeval in its origin; it is not relative, nor did man bring it into existence.
It is enhanced when the flesh triumphs over the spirit, but it does not
originate with the flesh. The father of evil is as real a personality as the father
of goodness. We shall now peruse the life-story of this Prince of Darkness as
narrated in the Pahlavi works
AHRIMAN
The primeval source of evil. If evil exists in reality, and is neither produced
by Ohrmazd nor by man, then the only alternative is that it must have
originated from an independent source. And so it is, say the Pahlavi works.
Ahriman, or the Evil Spirit, called in Pahlavi Gana Menu (possibly to be read
as Anrak Menu, from Av. Angra Mainyu), is its originator. As we have
already seen in the Pahlavi writings, man does not simply objectify the basest
and vilest in his own nature under the name of Ahriman; the rival spirit is a
personality. He is an independent being, and is co-existent with Ohrmazd.76
He abode from eternity in the abyss of endless darkness,77 and, aflame with
hatred, he rushed into the world at the beginning of creation to work for its
destruction, as he constantly wages war against Ohrmazd and the good
creation.78 He is described as dwelling [392] eternally in darkness and gloom;
and as wholly evil without goodness,79-80 as the prime source of evil in the
world,81 and as the producer of sin.82 Though it is possible for Ohrmazd to

drive him out of the world, it is not thought necessary to do so now until the
end of time, when Ohrmazd has determined his final defeat.83
76 Dd. 37.21,26.
77 Bd. 1.3, 9.
78 Dk., vol. 10, bk.5.4, p. 6.
79-80 Zsp. 1.17; Dd. 37.28; Sd. 62.3.
81 Dk., vol. 5, p. 324, 325.
82 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.101, p. 16.
83 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 5.5, 6, p. 6, 7.
Ahriman is a spirit. As the very name of the arch-fiend indicates, he is a
spirit, and as such can be thought of in the mind, but cannot be seen by the
eye or grasped by the hand. Having no material existence, even the wicked
souls, who are domiciled with him in hell, can only understand his nature but
cannot see him.84 The sainted priest Viraf, however, in his apocalyptic
journey to hell sees him in the inferno.85 In the beginning of creation he
sprang like a snake from the sky to the earth,86 and rushed upon the entire
creation like a fly.87 In one Pahlavi passage he is mentioned as possessing the
body of a lizard,88 though he could for his vile purposes assume the pleasing
shape of a young man, as noted in the same connection. In allegorical
references he is spoken of as assuming the form of a horse when subjugated
by Tahmuras.89
84 Dd. 19.1, 2, 5.
85 AV. 100.1.
86 Bd. 3.ll; Zsp. 2.3.

87 Bd. 3.14.
88 Bd. 3.9; 28.1.
89 Mkh. 27.21, 22.
Ahriman has backward knowledge. When the Evil Spirit defies Ohrmazd,
the latter reminds him that he is not omniscient;90 and does not, therefore,
foresee his own final defeat.91 In fact he has only after-knowledge, and knows
no event that is to come. He was not even aware of the existence of
Ohrmazd, until he arose from the abyss;92 thus, though cunning, he is totally
ignorant and blind.93 He cannot attain to any knowledge pertaining to the
Good Spirit,94 and does not make any preparations to avert his coming
downfall.95 What scanty knowledge he possesses is evil and he will see the
consequences of his ignorance at the time [393] of Renovation.96 He is
unobservant, stupid,97 and ill-informed.98 He is the after-thinker. Ignorance is
the parent of many evils, and Ahriman is the very personification of it. Mani,
in his heresy, ascribes foresight to Ahriman.99
90 Bd. 1.16.
91 Dk., vol. 4, p. 258.
92 Bd. 1.9;Zsp. 1.2.
93 Bd. 1.19; Dk., vol. 8, p. 445; Gs. 122.
94 Dk., vol. 6, p. 416.
95 Dk., vol. 7, p. 462.
96 Dk., vol. 2, p. 108.
97 Bd. 1.19.
98 Dk., vol. 5, p. 324.

99 Sg. 16.23.
As the arch-enemy of Ohrmazd, Ahriman swears vengeance upon the good
creation. The Evil Spirit is the avowed enemy of the creatures of
Ohrmazd.100 Being of malicious nature,101 and a blemish-giver,102 he ever
wishes evil to all.103 As the enemy of mankind, he ever strives to make man
unhappy;104 he is filled, in fact, with rancour against the entire creation; he is
bent upon its destruction and never thinks, speaks, or does anything but
harm to mankind.105 Ohrmazd saw through his omniscience that the Evil
Spirit would find scope for his work up to the time that the imperfections of
the world were removed, and evil became eradicated. He therefore proposed
peace to Ahriman, asking him to bring help unto the good creatures, and
offering to make him in return immortal, undecaying, hungerless, and thirstless.106 The Evil Spirit thought that it was helplessness and weakness on the
part of Ohrmazd that had thus compelled him to proffer peace, and rejected
the divine offer.107 He then defiantly answered the Good Spirit that not only
would he never bring help and praise unto the good creation, but he would
ever seek to destroy it and force the creatures into disaffection to Ohrmazd
and affection for himself.108 Ever since this first dispute with the Deity,
Ahriman has firmly adhered to his resolve, and is so absorbed in contriving
the ruin of his rival's creatures that he has never rested at ease since creation
began.109 He is bent upon perverting creatures from their own nature, in
order, if possible, to prevent Ohrmazd from bringing about the resurrection
and the renovation of the world and restoring his creatures.110 Having [394]
created evil for the ruin of the good creation, he strives to wrest the
supremacy from the hands of Ohrmazd,111 for the idea of revenge eats like a
canker into his heart. A righteous person of firm resolve can put him to
flight, for he is a coward, just as the prophet Zoroaster routed him. In the
beginning of creation when Ahriman first saw the angels and their prowess
he fled precipitately back to the darkness of hell;112 when next he beheld
Ohrmazd's creation, he became languid, and when he learnt Ohrmazd's
design of renovation he was stupefied, and fell on his knees;113 yet he
remained resolute in his wicked purpose and has never ceased to vent his
rage upon humanity. 100 Dd. 3.7; Dk., vol. 4, p. 208, 270; Gs. 127.

101 Bd. 1.10; Dd. 37.8, 10; Mkh. 10.5, 10.
102 Dk., vol. 5, p. 324, 325; vol. 6, p. 421; vol. 7, p. 445.
103 Bd. 1.8; Mkh. 8.23; Sg. 3,5.
104 Dk., vol. 7, p. 461.
105 Bd. 28.2.
106 Bd. 1.13.
107 Bd. 1, 15; Dk., vol. 8, p. 484, 485.
108 Bd. 1.14; Zsp. 1.6, 8; Sg. 4.12.
109 Bd. 28.3.
110 Sg. 12.72-74.
111 Bd. 28.1.
112 Bd. 6.1.
113 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.258, p. 100.
When Ahriman contemplates any harm to Ohrmazd, it recoils upon himself,
and proves of advantage to his adversary; but when Ohrmazd does anything
for his own advantage, it turns out of advantage to himself, and harm to
Ahriman.114 He is able to mar the doings of Ohrmazd, but in only so far as it
does not ultimately turn out for harm to Ohrmazd, for the final victory rests
with Ohrmazd.115 It is said that Ohrmazd had created Yim, Fari-dun, and
Kaus immortal, but that Ahriman rendered them mortal;116 yet when
Ahriman contrived to make the monstrous Zohak, the wicked Afrasiab, and
the accursed Sikandar immortal, Ohrmazd did not permit him to do it, as
that would have meant incalculable harm to the good creation.117

114 Dd. 94.8; Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6.12, p. 4.
115 Mkh. 8. 24-26.
116 Mkh. 8. 27, 28.
117 Mkh. 8. 29, 30.
Ahriman lures man to destruction by deceit. He is the arch-deceiver,118
corrupting man's nature, and beguiling him into wickedness and sin.119 He
lurks about to overtake man in his unguarded moments, and has stationed his
sentinels for the purpose. Woe unto the man who is found weak in the
moment of temptation. Ahriman desires that, man shall not actually recognize him, for if he once appraised the Evil Spirit at his true value, he would
not follow him on the path of Wickedness.120 Ahriman seduces man to give
up the religion of Ohrmazd and embrace his evil faith, and exults when this
object is achieved.121 [395] Inasmuch as he does not see that his work of
deception will finally bring his own ruin, he deceives himself.122
118 Dk., vol. 1, p. 22.
119 Dd. 37.8; Mkh. 45.8; Dk., vol. 8, p. 462; vol. 9, p. 624.
120 Bd. 28.40; Mkh. 40.26, 27; Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6.31, p. 10.
121 Bd. 28.4-6.
122 Dk., vol. 13, bk. 6; E. 38, p. 16.
Ahriman produces seductive demons to pervert mankind. The first creation
of Ahriman was falsehood.123 Afterwards he produced six chief demons,
Akoman, Indar, Sovar, Nakahed, Tairev, Zairich as adversaries to the six
archangels of Ohrmazd.124 Besides this he produced many demons and
fiends.125 Mankind formerly did not commit crime,126 and there was no sin,127
but Ahriman implanted various vices in man's nature as the enemies of the

soul; among such are avarice, covetousness, anger, jealousy, stubbornness,
lust, enmity, idleness, apostasy, slander, ignorance, malice, stinginess, hatred,
strife, and many other seductives that mislead men.128 Ahriman meditates
upon nothing but falsehood, wrath, malice, and discord;129 and especially
does he seek to conceal from man the reward of good deeds and the
retribution of evil deeds, thus leading human creatures to wickedness and
sin.130 In designing man's ruin Ahriman does not consider his triumph over
him complete unless he succeeds in effecting his spiritual destruction; nor
does he deem it a victory merely to deprive a man of his life and wife, child
and fortune; but he must succeed in seducing his soul.131 Nothing satisfies his
voracity so much as the capture of a human soul.
123 Bd. 1.24.
124 Bd. 1.24, 27.
125 Bd. 1.10.
126 Mkh. 13.6.
127 Dk., vol. 6, p. 421.
128 Bd. 3.17; Dd. 37.53, 54; Dk., vol. 6, p. 354; vol. 8, p. 469; vol. 10, bk.
5.4, p. 6; Gs. 10, 11.
129 Mkh. 10.5.
130 Mkh. 13.7-10.
131 Mkh. 46.4, 5.
Ahriman introduces disease and death into the world. When Ahriman first
entered the world, he plagued mankind, and introduced death among the
living beings;132 thus misery and affliction entered the world through him.133
And all the ills human flesh is heir to are from him. He smote the progenitor
of animals and made the primeval man mortal.134 Disease, destruction, and

death are identified with Ahriman, and form his chief work.135
132 Bd. 3.17; Dd. 37.72, 81; Dk., vol. 2, p. 92, 93.
133 Mkh. 37.10; 42.6, 7.
134 Dd. 37.46, 82.
135 Zsp. 5.4; Dk., vol. 4, p. 233, 238; vol. 12, bk. 6.308, p. 25.
[396] Ahriman infests the earth with noxious creatures. One of the many
malicious acts of Ahriman, to thwart the creation of Ohrmazd, is his creation
of biting and venomous creatures, such as the snake, scorpion, frog, lizard,
and many others, in so great a number that the noxious creatures did not
leave an empty space on earth to the size of the point of a needle.136 Hence
killing these noxious creatures and extirpating their burrows are meritorious
deeds.137
136 Bd. 3.15; Zsp 2.9.
137 SLS. 20.5; Mkh. 5.8; Sd. 43.1-10; Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 317, p. 29.
Ahriman disfigures Ohrmazd's creation. Smoke and darkness were mingled
with fire by the Evil Spirit;138 the trees that grew on the earth before the
appearance of Ahriman had neither thorns, nor rough bark, nor was poison
mixed with any of their species. It was Ahriman who introduced these into
vegetation, also blight to wither it.139 Thus he brings disfigurement upon the
creatures of Ohrmazd,140 and exultingly cries out that everything of
Ohrmazd has been assailed by him and spoiled.141 Over against each one of
Ohrmazd's good creations there is balanced an evil one of Ahriman.
138 Bd. 3.24; Zsp. 2.11.
139 Bd, 3.16; 27.1.
140 Zsp. 4.10.

141 Zsp. 4.3.
The end of Ahriman. One of the essential proofs of Ahriman's inequality
with Ohrmazd is that he is not eternal. As has been noted above, although
he was co-eval and co-equal with Ohrmazd, he is not co-eternal, because
there will be a time when he will cease to exist.142 Ohrmazd and Ahriman are
therefore not actually balanced equally against each other. As mankind advances in righteousness, and succeeds in weakening the dominion of
wickedness, Ahriman will be baffled in his vile attempts to tempt men to the
wicked path.143 Ahriman will then find his resources exhausted and will
become impotent and confounded.144 Being completely overpowered,145 and
broken,146 predominating no longer,147 he will become afflicted and
miserable.148 He will bow his unwilling knees to the divine authority. Thus
baffled, [397] he will flee into darkness and be fettered in hell in perpetual
sorrow.149 We are informed in another place that when he is thus defeated,
he will rush back to hell,150 and disappear.151 Still other passages state that he
will be repulsed and slain.152 Ahriman exists in the world so long as he can
find his lodgment even in one man in the world, but when, owing to the
goodness of men, he will be completely cast out from human bodies, he will
be exterminated.153 He will enter into nothingness.154
142 Bd. 1.3; Gs. 129; Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 278, p. 7.
143 Dk., vol. l, p. 22.
144 Dd. 37.15, 20, 64; Mkh. 8.13; Gs. 158.
145 Dk., vol. 5, p. 314, 324.
146 Dk., vol. 7, p. 458.
147 Dd. 7.3.
148 Dk., vol. 5, p. 346; vol. 7, p.461; Gs. 157.

149 Dk., vol. 3, p. 150.
150 Dk., vol. 8, p. 441, 486.
151 Dd. 37.71, 122; Dk., vol. 8, p. 436, 445; Jsp. p. 109.
152 Dk., vol. 9, p. 627; Jsp. p. 120.
153 Dk., vol. 8, p. 436; vol. 11 bk. 6.264, p. 102.
154 Dd. 37.59, 114; Mkh. 57.6; Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6.297, p. 13.
The final disappearance of evil from the world. With the disappearance of
the Father of Evil, goodness will completely rout evil.155 The great conflict
between good and evil will eventually end in perfecting good and in
eliminating evil.156 Moral and physical imperfections will vanish; for vice and
impiety, wickedness and sin, demons and fiends, disease and death will be no
more.157 The dual nature of the creatures of good and evil will be supplanted
by the single characteristic of goodness. The evil creatures will perish.158
155 Dk., vol. 5, p. 326.
156 Dd. 37.122.
157 Dd. 37.120, 121; Mkh. 8.14, 15.
158 Bd. 1.7.
DIVS
The emissaries of Ahriman. There are six arch-fiends created by Ahriman in
exact opposition to the archangels; and there are also other minor demons as
their evil confederates.159 They love evil for its own sake. Hell is the specific
habitat assigned to them, and from there they rush to the summit of Mount
Arezur to hold their infernal council.160 The north is believed to be the
region of Ahriman and demons, just as the south is that of Ohrmazd and
angels; and darkness is the steadfast quality of this fiendish crew.161

159 Bd. 28.12.
160 Dd. 33.3, 5.
161 Dd. 37.85.
Their work. The diabolical host works for procuring success for Ahriman.
They will do this up to the end of the world.162 [398] The strongest and most
triumphant of their weapons against man is deceit;163 they lead man to sin
through it.164 Every demon is an instigator of some evil; on that account, man
should always entertain an abhorrence for the demons. He should array himself on the side of the angels, and join in the fight against the demons, who
always contemplate harm to man.165 When they have sway over man's
doings, righteousness is arrested and wickedness thrives,166 for man becomes
sinful and wicked in their company.167 They take up their abode in him when
his innate wisdom forsakes him;168 whence once possessed by demons, he is
possessed by evil knowledge.169 The demons seize upon and carry off onethird of the wisdom and glory of that man who eats in the dark without
washing his hands.170 Procrastination on the part of man also helps the
demons; for example, when a man is in the habit of postponing some good
work from day to day, until he is overtaken by death, and the good deed
remains unaccomplished, the demons are greatly rejoiced.171 Persons who
associate with the wicked in this world get demons for their companions in
the next.172 The fire of Ohrmazd chases the demons and puts them to flight;
for, when a large number of them rushed to destroy the child Zoroaster at
his birth, they could not harm him owing to the presence of the fire.173 Zoroaster brought them all to his feet, and forced them to rush headlong into the
jaws of hell. Just as the sheep is terrified by the smell of the wolf, so do the
demons tremble when they smell the soul of a righteous person.174 The
demons will live so long as man will have something of the demon in him.
When righteousness at last shall triumph in the world, and the world of
humanity reach perfection at the final renovation, the demons will sink into
their native darkness, and perish forever.175
162 Dd. 37.59.

163 Ib., 87.
164 Dk., vol. 2, p. 67.
165 Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. 307, p. 24.
166 Dk., vol. 2, p. 68.
167 Dk., vol. 3. p. 166, 167; vol. 7, p. 459.
168 Dk., vol. 3, p. 159.
169 Dk., vol. 3, p. 166.
170 SLS. 9.8.
171 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.89, p. 3.
172 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.133, p. 39.
173 SLS. 10.4; 12.11.
174 Afrin-i Ardâfarvash in Pazend Texts, p. 84.
175 Dd. 37.20.
[399]
AKOMAN
Ahriman’s premier. As Vohuman is the first celestial being in the good
creation, so Akoman, Evil Mind, ranks first among the evil creatures.
Ahriman first produced Falsehood and after that Akoman,176 as a
consequence of which they often work in concert.177 Still another text speaks
of Akoman and Varun as created together.178 Akoman came out from the
dark world of Ahriman;179 and of all the fiends this demon of perversion is

most to be dreaded.180
176 Bd. 1.24.
177 Dd. 37.53.
178 Dk., vol. 3, p. 158, 159.
179 Bd. 1.27.
180 Dk., vol. 9, p. 625.
His attempt to enter the mind of the prophet Zaratusht when a child to
pervert it is frustrated by Vohuman. When Ahriman learnt of the birth of
Zaratusht, who was to be a sure weapon of destruction against the Kingdom
of Wickedness, he sent Akoman with instructions to enter the infant's mind
deceitfully and pervert it.181 The fiend approached the house in which
Zaratusht was born and contemplated entering by the door.182 But being as
stupid and ignorant as his father he was easily defeated by his own weapon
of deceit being turned against him. Vohuman, who had chased him to the
spot, schemingly turned back and asked him to enter the house. Akoman
thought that as his rival was leaving the place, his own work was finished,
and consequently returned without accomplishing anything.183 Akoman,
moreover, is generally said to frighten children at their birth with the ghastly
picture of their sufferings at the Renovation, and this is given as a reason
why children cry at birth.184
181 Zsp. 14.8.
182 Zsp. 14.9.
183 Zsp. 14.10, 11.
184 Dk., vol. 8, p. 439.
Evil thoughts in man come from Akoman. In opposition to Vohuman,

Akoman gives evil thoughts to men and causes discord.185 It is owing to those
evil thoughts of his that man becomes wicked.186 Man has to purge himself of
vicious thoughts. Unless he does this, he finds himself driven hither and
thither [400] like a shuttlecock, influenced now by Vohuman, now by
Akoman. The man whose will is ruled by Akoman fails to discriminate
between good and evil,187 for the friendship of Akoman makes one vicious,188
and he who entertains Akoman as his guest turns out to be wicked.189 Such a
man courts spiritual destruction.190 When Akoman prevails over Vohuman in
the mind of man, his intelligence becomes blunted and he loses greatness in
both the worlds,191 inasmuch as righteousness flees from him and he is
steeped in sin.192 He is even spoken of as introducing physical evil in the
world,193 even as he brings evil knowledge of religion to man's mind,194 and
makes him miserable.195
185 Bd. 28.7.
186 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.69.21, p. 388.
187 Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.30.8, p. 243.
188 Dk., vol. 6, p. 357.
189 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6.78, p. 21; 87, p. 25; vol. 11, bk. 6.193, p. 69.
190 Dk., vol. 6, p. 410.
191 Dk., vol. 1, p. 28; vol. 3, p. 152.
192 Dk., vol. l, p. 28.
193 Dk., vol. 6, p. 411.
194 Dk., vol. 6, p. 414.
195 Dk., vol. 8, p. 466.
DRUJ

The change wrought in the conception of her work. This personification of
wickedness and deceit has by this time lost her distinctive individuality, and
consequently she no longer remains an exclusive rival of Artavahisht, or Best
Righteousness. In fact her name is not mentioned as Ahriman's countercreation against Artavahisht. Indar, as we shall see in the sequel, usurps her
place as Artavahisht's recognized adversary. Druj no longer in the Pahlavi
period stands exclusively as the class designation of the female demons,
which in earlier times was her chief characteristic. The term is at times
promiscuously applied to male and female demons alike; in fact it now
designates demon in general. Ahriman himself is most frequently termed
Druj; and several demons are simultaneously termed divs as well as drujes in
one and the same text.196 The evil passions of man are personified as
drujes.197 These abide in man to pervert his nature,198 for Ahriman has
created the drujes;199 he is their leader,200 and is himself the arch-druj.
196 Bd. 28.11, 13, 14, 20, 33.
197 Mkh. 41.8-11.
198 Dd. 94.1.
199 Bd. 1.10.
200 Dk., vol. 7, p. 458.
[401] Druj's work. The wicked deeds of man further the evil power of Druj
in the world. When man leaves the blessed company of Ohrmazd, he is
easily overpowered by her,201 who makes his life miserable and full of
blemish.202 So long as he remains under her damaging influence, he cannot
work on behalf of his creator.203 Druj Nasu, the embodiment of pollution,
performs her work of defilement.204
201 Dk., vol. 7, p. 496.
202 Dk., vol. 8, p. 475.

203 Dk., vol. 8, p. 473.
204 Dd. 17.7, 8.
What puts her to flight. Recital of the holy spells, the heartfelt expiation on
the part of the sinner, and the performance of righteous deeds will drive Druj
out of man,205 she flees fat from a man of religious inclination.206 It is the duty
of man, therefore, to drive away the various drujes that may surround him.207
Ohrmazd has endowed him with the knowledge whereby to rout them,208
and has given him strength commensurate with his needs. The angels help to
drive out Druj from the creation, an act that will contribute to furthering the
work of the Renovation.209 When the world reaches the state of goodness,
Druj will be impotent and perish.210
INDAR
Transformation of a great Indian divinity into an execrated demon in
Persia. In the Pahlavi texts Ahriman is represented to have created Indar as
the opponent of ArtaVahisht.211 In Ys. 48.1, Druj is glossed in Pahlavi by
Indar. His personality is again quite ill-defined. He does not personify
Wickedness proper, as the opponent of Artavahisht should logically do in
the dualistic system; but his chief business is to drive the thoughts of men
from virtuous deeds, and incite them to do away with the sacred shirt and
girdle,212 He will be routed by Artavahisht in the final struggle.213
205 Dk., vol. 1, p. 5; vol. 12, bk. 6. 315, p. 27, 28.
206 Dk., vol. 2, p. 110; vol. 6, p. 363.
207 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.130. p. 36, 37; SBE., 47, bk. 7.1.6, p. 5.
208 Dk., vol.4, p. 245, 269.
209 Dk., vol. 2, p. 111, 112; vol. 6, p. 417.
210 Dk., vol. 7, p. 458.

211 Phl. Vd. 19.43; Bd. 1.27.
212 Bd. 28.8, 10; Dk., SBE., vol. 37, bk. 9.9.1, p. 181, 182.
213 Bd. 30.29.
[402]
SOVAR
Enemy of the divine Kingdom of Righteousness. The business of this
demon is, by introducing tyranny and anarchy into the world, to thwart the
efforts of Shatravar towards establishing the Divine Kingdom upon earth.214
He is delighted if the faithful discard their sacred shirts and girdles.215 He
falls before his rival and perishes at the final conflagration wrought by the
flood of molten metal at the end of the world.216
214 Bd. 28.9.
215 Bd. 28.10.
216 Bd. 30.29.
TAROMAT
The demon that dries up the spring of devotion in man. This demon,
residing in the human will, produces disobedience,217 and dissuades man
from following the dictates of Spandarmad;218 but he will meet with his end
on the last day at the hands of Spandarmad.219
217 Bd. 28.14.
218 Dd. 94.2.
219 Bd 30.29.
NAONGHAS

Taromat's confederate. This demon is identified with Taromat,220 and is
ranked as the opponent of Spandarmad. His Avestan counterpart is
Naonghaithya. He gives discontent to creatures and is delighted when one
goes without shirt and girdle.221
220 Bd. 30.29.
221 Bd. 28.10.
TAIREV
The opponent of the archangel of perfection. The demon is the adversary
of Khurdad222 and mingles poison with plants,223 and is rejoiced when one
walks barefooted.224 He will lie low before his opponent.225
222 Phl. Vd. 19.43.
223 Bd. 28.11.
224 Bd. 28.13.
225 Bd. 30.29.
ZAIRICH
Tairev's comrade. He also poisons plants226 and other eatables.227 He is the
enemy of Amardad,228 who will finally vanquish him.229
226 Bd. 28.11.
227 Dd. 37.52.
228 Phl. Vd. 19.43.
229 Bd. 30.29.
[403]

ASTOVIDAD
This demon of death casts his deadly noose around all. He it is who causes
the painful separation of the soul from the body and brings death.230 He casts
around the necks of all that are born in this world a noose which cannot be
thrown off by any one during life. But at the dissolution of the body, when
the soul emerges from its prison of clay, it can shake off the halter if it is
righteous, but is dragged to hell by means of this rope if it is wicked.231
When the wicked demon Astovidad strokes a man, he causes lethargy; when
he lays his hands on the sick, he makes him feverish; when he looks the
victim in the eye, with his deadly gaze, he deprives him of life.232 He was
sent by Ahriman in the beginning of creation to slay the primeval man;233
and ever since that time he has been destroying all, and yet he knows no
check.234
230 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 5.19, p. 16.
231 Bd. 3.22; Dd. 23.3; Dk., vol. 7, p. 494, 495; Gs. 141.
232 Bd. 28.35.
233 Bd. 3.21;Zsp. 4.4.
234 Mkh. 2.117.
VIZARSH
Astovidad's collaborator. The demon Vizarsh235 frightens the souls during
the three nights of their stay in this world after death.236 He sits at the gate
of hell, ready to drag the wicked souls down to the infernal depths, as soon
as they are sentenced to hell by the heavenly judges. When the souls
approach the bridge, he contends with Srosh for their possession.237 He casts
a noose around the neck of all persons. The righteous ones are able to free
themselves from it, but the wicked ones are entangled in it, and are dragged
into the infernal abyss by it.238
235 Av. Vizaresha.

236 Bd. 28.18; cf. Bd. Modi, An untranslated chapter of the Bundehesh, 2.
237 Mkh. 2.162.
238 Phl. Vd. 19.29.
ESHM
An impetuous assailant of man. This demon, Eshm,239 who has no bodily
existence,240 occasions trouble in the World by [404] contests.241 He swells
man's spirit to wrath. He contrives all evil, and he attacks mankind with the
sevenfold strength of a fiend,242 and man loses his senses when Eshm
overpowers him.243 He rejoices when man disregards the admonitions of a
religious preceptor,244 and any man in whom he makes his abode acts like a
thief.245 Destruction follows where he steps in.246 For example, through his
seductiveness he made King Kaus discontented with his earthly possessions,
and bred in him a burning desire for conquering the heavenly regions,247 in
which attempt to fly up to the sky he fell to his undoing. He incites Arjasp,
the arch-enemy of Zoroastrianism, to invade the territories of Gushtasp, who
had embraced Zoroaster's faith,248 but Arjasp's ruin followed. Terrible as was
the condition of Iran when Afrasiab, and still earlier when the monstrous
Zohak ruled over her destinies,249 it would have been immeasurably worse
had Eshm been the earthly sovereign.250 When he fails to spread discord and
quarrelling among, the righteous, he works among the wicked to the same
end, and again if defeat meets him here too, he causes strife among the
demons and fiends.251 He contests the passage of the soul to the Bridge on
the dawn of the fourth day after man's death.252 One of the Pahlavi
commentators speaks of him as the antagonist of Vohuman,253 but his special
adversary is Srosh, who will smite him in the end.254
239 Av. Aeshma.
240 Mkh. 27.37.
241 Dd. 37.52.
242 Bd. 28.15, 17.

243 Dk., vol. 3, p. 152.
244 Bd. 28.20.
245 Dk.,. vol. 3, p. 138.
246 Bd. 28.16.
247 Dk., SEE., vol. 37, bk. 9.22.5, 6, p. 221.
248 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.4.87, p. 72.
249 Dk., vol. 7, p. 454, 455.
250 Mkh. 27.34-36.
251 Dd. 37.104.
252 Mkh. 2.115, 117.
253 Phl. Vd. 19.43.
254 Bd. 30.29; Mkh. 8.14.
Aposh
Tishtar's antagonist. The Pahlavi works mainly repeat the account of this
demon's encounter with Tishtar, that is, how the angel of rain fled a mile
away in terror when he was first assaulted by this demon of drought, but how
he later, after having begged more strength from Ohrmazd and received it,
at last overpowered [405] powered his adversary.255 This demon struggles
always to stop the rain from falling; and failing in this, he strives to convert
its flow into a cause of damage.256 Aposh is the chief cause of drought,257 but
the evil eye of the greedy rulers and false judges falling on the rain, prevents
its fall;258 and in this act Spenjagra, another demon, joins with him.259
255 Bd. 7. 8-10; Zsp. 6. 9-11.
256 Dd. 93.12.
257 Bd. 28.39. 258 Dk., vol. 3, p. 148.
259 Bd. 7. 12; 28. 39; Dk., vol. 3, p. 148.
Jeh
A powerful demoness. Ahriman has created the menses in women; and Jeh is
the demoness of menstruation. She is so powerful that her very look smites
as nothing else could do.260 When Ahriman first saw man, Ohrmazd's best
creation in the world, he was confounded; and coward as he is, he fell
prostrate bewailing. His evil confederates tried all in their power to give him
courage but to no purpose, until finally Jeh, by her beguiling devices,

succeeded in reclaiming him from impotency and dejection.261 260 SLS. 3.
29.
261 Bd. 3. 1-7.
The inmates in the house of ill-fame are her creatures. It is at her promptings
that they bring upon earth this darkest curse that blights human life.
Other Demons
The author of the Bundahishn tells us that every single demon is
accompanied by many more, and it would be tedious to enumerate them all
here. They are certainly very numerous, and much of their defiling nature is
mingled up in the bodies of men.262 In fact, there are as many demons as the
sins that man commits.263 The following are the demons and fiends who are
mentioned in the texts, but about whom nothing special is known. They are
Mitokht and Arast (falsehood), Arashk (malice), Bushasp (sloth), Uda
(chattering while eating), Zarman (decrepitude), Akatash (perversion),
Oshtohad (excessive winter), [406]Chishmak (disaster), Varun (lust), Sej
(decay), Az (avarice), Niyaz (distress), Nas (defilement), Push (stinginess),
Friftar (seducer), Spazg (slander), Aighash and Sur Chashmih (evil eye), But
(idol), Kundak (wizard), Kashvish (revenge), Drivish (poverty), Daiwish
(deceit), Nung (shame), Paitish, Dadani, Frazisht, Nizisht, and Safle.264
262 Bd. 28.37,38.
263 Bd. 28.43.
264 For minor demons see Gray, The Foundation of the Iranian Religions, p. 224226.
[407]
CHAPTER XLIV

LIFE AFTER DEATH
Death is the completion of life. The faithful is warned, in the Pahlavi texts
as in the Avesta, that he should always remember the transitory state of
earthly existence, the death of the body, and the responsibility of his soul;1
for, in the end, the body will be mingled with the dust, but the soul will

survive; and man should therefore labour for the future welfare of the soul.2
Death is the completion and perfection of life.3 It is not an extinction of
individuality, but a transfer from one state to another; it is the transition of
the soul to a higher life, in which it gives up one duty to take up another.4
Death brings the dissolution of the body, the earthly elements are dispersed,
and the spiritual elements accompany the soul, which now proceeds to the
next world to render the account of its deeds.5 The body served as the
garment of the soul as long as the soul wore it during life, but when it is
outworn the soul flings it behind it. The body is likened, in more than one
Pahlavi passage, to a house, of which the soul is a tenant; for when the body
is divested of vital power and falls to the ground, the master of the house
leaves it to crumble into dust.6 Just as a rider becomes helpless without his
saddle and his weapons to overthrow his enemy, so does the soul lose all
hopes of routing the Druj, when the body perishes; for the soul is the lord of
life and conducts the battle between good and evil.7 It is the master of the
body.8 The body becomes useless and perishes when the soul leaves it.9 1
Mkh. 18. 3.
2 Mkh. 1.22, 23; AnAtM. 105. 3 Dk., vol. 5, p. 330.
4 Sg. 4.87; 12.79.
5 Bd. 17.9; Sg. 4.88-92; Dk., vol. 6, p. 359.
6 Dd. 23.6; AnAtM. 142.
7 Dk.,vol. 6, p. 354.
8 Dd. 3.8.
9 Dk., vol. 3, p. 150, 175.
Man should not put his trust in the possessions of this earth; [408] his
happiness is but the passing cloud of a rainy day; riches and wealth, titles and
honours, distinctions of birth and race-all will be of no avail when death will
at last come upon him.10 Body is the lineament of man; he should not mistake
it as his real self. Whoso moulds his actions with the higher object of the
welfare of his soul gains this world by leaving good name and fame behind
him, and obtains the next as his reward; but the slave to passions and evil
desires, who lives solely for the body, loses both this world and the next as
well.11 The body of the one is lean in this world, but his soul is fat in heaven,
whereas a man who pines after bodily pleasures is fattened in body in this
world, but his soul is hungry and lean in the next world.12 There is a remedy
for every thing, but not for death.13 A man may live a hundred years in this

world, but death will at last overtake him.14 Then at last he will sleep in the
deep silence of death. The closed eyes will not open; the heart will not
throb; hands and feet will not move; and the prince and peasant will leave
the world in exactly the same manner.15 The body will then be removed to
its final resting-place, where go the great and the small, the master and the
servant, the righteous and the wicked alike.16 10 Mkh. 2.98-110.
11 Mkh. 21.10.
12 BYt. 2.56.
13 Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6. A.6, p. 37.
14 AnAtM. 139.
15 AnAtM. 143.
16 AnAtM. 145.
A man may avoid the danger of tigers and wild beasts, of robbers and
inimical persons, but he cannot live without fear of the demon of death.17 He
is helpless when death swoops down on him. Some die at an early age,
almost as if they had never been born, and even those that live long have
ultimately to quit the world.18 Life is short in this world but long in the
next.19 Man should practice such good deeds during his lifetime that on his
death-bed he should think it would have been better had he done even more
of them, and avoid such acts for which he would have to wish during the last
moments of his life that they had not been performed.20 The individual who
has been indifferent [409] in his devotions to the Lord is distressed when
death approaches and thinks of him the more.21
17 Dk., vol. 7, p. 452, 453.
18 Gs. 165.
19 AnKhK. 5.
20 Dk., vol. 10, bk. 6.17, p. 6.
21 Dk., vol. 5, p. 279.
Srosh's help indispensable for the disembodied souls. At death the soul
shakes off the fetters of the body. This severance of the soul from the body is
fraught with momentous difficulties for the former. As an infant that is just
born in this world requires care from a midwife and others, so does a soul
that has just emerged from the body require help and protection against evil
influences. It is said that the righteous Srosh acts at this juncture as a midwife
to the righteous soul in its bewilderment, and does not let it go into the

clutches of Ahriman.22 It is therefore deemed advisable to secure the services
of this angel even in advance by propitiating him with rituals during the
lifetime of the individual. But if that has not been the case, his relatives
should never fail to offer sacrifices in his honour immediately after death and
continue them for the three days and three nights that the soul stays in this
world after death.23 Besides watching and protecting the soul at this critical
period, Srosh is also, one of the judges who will then take account of the
soul. It is indispensable, therefore, to order ceremonies to be performed for
Srosh during the time that the soul tarries in this world before embarking on
its celestial journey.24
22 Sd. 58.7.
23 Dd. 28.5; SLS. 17.3; Sd. 58.5, 6, 8, 9.
24 Dd. 28. 6.
The souls visualize the good or bad deeds of the lives they have just
completed. In conformity with the statement of the Avestan texts, the
Pahlavists also depict the human souls as hovering about the head of the
dead for three nights after death, experiencing joy or grief, according as they
have lived in righteousness or wickedness.25 It is stated that during the first
night satisfaction from their good thoughts comes to the souls and vexation
from their evil thoughts, during the second night satisfaction from their
good words and vexation from their evil words, and during the third night
satisfaction from their good deeds and vexation from their evil deeds.26 The
demon Vizarsh struggles with the souls during this period.27 The souls
experience [410] as much pleasure or pain during these nights as they have
had during their whole life on earth.28 The soul of the wicked person, over
whose head hangs the coming retribution, now wishes that it could re-enter
the body for some time in order to make up for the faults and shortcomings
of the life that it has just finished.29 Mohammedanism, in the same manner,
refers to the desire of the soul of the dead person to be sent back to the
bodily life that it can practise good deeds that have been left undone. As a
rider requires a horse, so the soul needs a body, without which it is unable to
act in this world.30 It now discovers, when it is too late, that it has lost the
opportunity and worked all the while for naught. It feels as if it had thrown
away all good deeds either into the fire to be burnt or into the water to be
drowned instead of practising them and storing them up for its own merit.31

It wishes it had enjoyed less in the world below and practised virtue more,32
and it realizes too late that the most precious period of its earthly life is now
lost beyond recovery.
25 Bd. Modi, An untranslated chapter of the Bundehesh, 2; Mkh. 2.114, 156-160;
Dd. 20.2; 24.2; 25.2; AV. 4.9-14; 17.2-9; Hn. 2.2-5; 3.2-5.
26 Dd. 24.4; 25.4.
27 Bd. 28.18; Modi, op. cit., 2.
28 Hn. 2.6, 11, 16; 3.5, 10, 16.
29 Dd. 16.4.
30 Dk., vol. 6, p. 380, 381.
31 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6.219, p. 82.
32 Dk., vol. 11, bk. 6. 211, p. 78.
The souls escorted by the genii of their own deeds to the other world. At
the end of the third night when the dawn breaks, the souls undertake their
memorable journey with the co-operation of the good angels Srosh, Vae the
good, and Varhran; in the midst of the opposition of Astovidat, of Vae the
bad, Frazisht, Nizisht, and Eshm. When the souls pass from the midst of the
sweet-scented trees, if they are righteous, or from among foul-scented trees,
if they are wicked, they meet their conscience, the righteous soul beholding
her in the form of a beautiful damsel, personifying the store of its own good
works, but the wicked soul seeing a hideous woman, typifying the store of its
own evil deeds.33 In addition to the escort of the angelic figure or the
fiendish apparition, the Denkard and some copies of the Bundahishn
mention that a beautiful fat cow and a fair garden, as well as this damsel, are
met with by a righteous soul, while an ugly, lean cow and a barren desert,
besides the hideous hag, are encountered by a wicked soul.34 The description
of the celestial [411] journey and of the happenings on the way, as found in
the Menuk-i Khrat, differs a little from the other works. These, in agreement
with the accounts in the Avestan texts, depict the soul as meeting its daena
prior to its crossing the bridge, but Menuk-i Khrat brings her on the scene
after the soul has passed the bridge. Besides, the pious soul is made to
converse on the Way with Srosh, which is not the case in the other texts.
33 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 5-7; Dd. 24.5; 25.5; Mkh. 2.115, 127-181; AV. 4.1536; 17.10-26; Dk., vol. 2, p. 82, 83; Hn. 2.19-32; 3. 17-20.

34 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 5, 7; Dk., vol. 2, p. 83.
The heavenly judges. The Pahlavi works give us an elaborate account of the
way in which justice is administered to the souls after death. The reckoning
takes place on the dawn of the fourth day.35 Throughout the entire life of the
mortals it is the duty of Vohuman to note down three times each day the
good and evil deeds of everyone, both men and women, in the book of life.36
Mihr, Srosh, and Rashn sit as judges in the hereafter to take account of the
souls that approach the bridge.37 Unlike the human judges who base their
decisions on the biased or fallible evidence of the witnesses for the plaintiff
or the accused, the divine judges need only to scan with their spiritual eyes
the record kept by an archangel, and then to acquit or sentence the souls
accordingly.38 Rashn holds the balance in his hands and weighs the good and
evil deeds of the souls so impartially that the scales do not turn wrongfully,
even by a hair's breadth in favour of a righteous man or of a wicked, of a lord
or of a king, but work equally in case of the peasant and the prince.39 Job
makes a solemn protestation of his integrity and says that let God weigh him
in an even balance that he may know the truth.40 The works of the dead are
similarly weighed in a balance according to the teachings of Mohammed.
Injustice and partiality have no place in this celestial court, which is
administered with stern but exact equity.41
35 Dd. 13.2; 20.3; Gs. 133.
36 Dd. 14.2.
37 Dd. 14.3.4; Mkh. 2.118.
38 Dk., vol. 7, p. 451.
39 Mkh. 2.119-122.
40 Job. 31.6; cf. Proverbs, 16.2; 1 Samuel 2.3.
41 Sg. 4.98,99.
Location of the Bridge of Judgment. All the righteous as well as the wicked
souls have to proceed to this bridge for judgment, where the account of the
souls takes place.42 The bridge rests on the peak called 'the peak of justice,'
situated in the [412]middle of the world in Iranvej, and is of the height of a
hundred men. The two extremities of the bridge rest on the northern and
southern ridges of Mount Alburz.43
42 Bd. 12.7; Mkh. 2.115; Gs. 133; AnAtM. 139, 147.

43 Phl. Vd. 19.30; Bd. 12.7; cf. Modi, op. cit., 1; Dd. 21.2.
The bridge provides a wide passage to the pious souls, but confronts the
wicked with its sharp edge. The bridge is guarded by the angels and the
spiritual dogs.44 It is broad as a beam and has many sides. Some of these are
twenty-seven reeds in width or nine spears or nine javelins or even a league
in width, whereas the others are as sharp as the edge of a razor.45 The bridge
is so arranged that it presents its broad side when a righteous soul passes over
it, and gives it an easy passage, but puts forward its thin edge when a wicked
soul attempts to cross it.46 According to Mohammedanism all souls have to
cross the Bridge as-Sirat which lies across heaven and hell. It is finer than a
hair and sharper than the edge of a sword. It gives an easy passage to the
righteous souls, but the souls of the wicked cannot cross it and fall headlong
into hell. The pious soul is helped by Srosh, Atar, and by its own conscience
to cross the bridge and go to its destination, but the impious one falls
headlong into hell.47 A passage adds that, the fire Frabag smites the darkness
and enables a pious soul to pass over the narrow edge in the form of fire.48
Furthermore, Vae, the angel of wind,, takes such a soul by its hand and
escorts it to its proper place.49 Of all the wicked souls the one of a malicious
man finds it most difficult to cross the bridge, for malice is a sin which does
not affect the sinner only, but generally abides in a lineage.50 The wicked
soul complains that it would prefer being cut by a sharp knife or pierced by
an arrow to its being obliged to cross the terrible bridge.51
44 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 1.
45 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 1; Dd. 21.3, 5; Mkh. 2.123; AV. 5.1.
46 Bd Modi, op. cit., 10; Dd. 21.5, 7; 85.7.
47 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 10, 11, 13; Dd 20.4; 21.7; 25.6; 34.3, 4; Mkh. 2.124;
AnKhK. 5.
48 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 9.
49 Ib, 11.
50 Mkh. 21.19.
51 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 14.
Insane persons and children are not accountable for their own deeds, but
their parents are responsible. All those that are mentally unsound and also
children are not held responsible for their deeds, but are considered eligible
for paradise.52 We [413] are further told in another passage of the Pahlavi

texts that the children accompany their parents either to heaven or hell as
the latter have deserved.53 The children that have thus entered hell with their
wicked parents are separated from them if due ceremonies are performed in
honour of Srosh by their relatives, and may then proceed to heaven.54
52 Dk., vol. 2, p. 89, 90; vol. 3, p. 144; vol. 4, p. 189, 190.
53 Sd. 47.2.
54 Sd 47.3.
The method of administering justice in the heavenly tribunal. Among the
ancient Egyptians when the soul appeared before the heavenly tribunal, its
heart was weighed in a balance. Similarly, the ordinary way of judging the
souls according to the Pahlavi writers, is said to be that of weighing the good
and evil deeds in a scale and deciding to which of the two sides the scale
turned. Roughly speaking, if the good deeds exceed the evil, the soul is
entitled to go to heaven.55 But if the evil deeds preponderate, the soul is
assigned to go to hell.56 The side of the balance that outweighs the other
even by a hair of the eyelash determines the fate of the soul accordingly.57 If
the good deeds are in weight three Sroshocharans more than the evil deeds,
the soul attains to heaven;58 if the evil deeds exceed the good ones by three
Sroshocharans, the soul is doomed to hell until the time of Resurrection.59
An infidel is saved from hell if good deeds are one Tanapuhar weight more
than his evil deeds.60 55 Mkh. 12.13 SLS. 6.2-4; Sg. 4.93, 94.
56 Mkh. 12.15; Sg. 4.95, 96; AV. 6.10.
57 Sd; 2.3, 4.
58 Phl. Vd. 7.52; SLS. 6.3; AV. 6.9. 59 Phl. Vd. 7.52.
60 SLS. 6.6.
The author of the Dadestan texts takes a more rational view and asserts that
it is not simply the preponderating good or evil deeds that score off their
opposite, so that the soul receives recompense or retribution on the residue,
but that every single good or evil deed is taken into account separately and
receives its recompense or retribution in accordance. Thus a righteous soul
whose preponderating good deeds have entitled it to heaven does not escape
a temporary punishment for the few misdeeds that stand on its account.
Similarly the wicked soul that is doomed to hell for its evil deeds has at least
a few good deeds to its credit, and consequently receives temporary
enjoyment severally for these before it is sent to perdition for its wrongs.61 In

other words, [414] the righteous soul may have a few misdeeds for which it
has not atoned, and will therefore undergo a corresponding punishment after
death before it is admitted to the company of the righteous,62 and the same
is logically true of the soul of the sinner. The sins usually accounted for at
the bridge are those that have not been expiated during the lifetime of the
individual.62 Those that are already atoned for in this world are not laid to
his charge hereafter, but stand cancelled in the book of life, and no account
is taken of them at the bridge.64 We find, however, in another place that
such a soul does receive a temporary punishment at the bridge, but is spared
the future torture of hell.65 61 Dd. 13.4; 24.6.
62 Phl. Vd. 7. 52.
63 Dd. 24.5.
64 Dd. 13.2, 3.
65 Dd. 41.8; Sd. 45.10.
We have already seen that the Pahlavi-Persian works speak of the Treasury
of the Eternal Weal where the supererogatory deeds of the faithful are stored
and from which the souls found to be in need of merit at the Bridge of
Judgment are compensated.66 It is said that every Zoroastrian gets the benefit
of the accumulated good deeds performed by the faithful in all the seven
zones of the earth. If a soul is found deficient in merit at the reckoning the
deficit is made up from this treasury.67 This doctrine appears in the later
Judaism and Christianity.68 If a man brings forward false accusation against
another or steals his property, the heavenly judges take away corresponding
merit of good deeds, which the sinner may have done in this world and
credit it to the account of the wronged person. But when it is found that the
wrong-doer has not any accumulated merit of his own, the judges draw upon
the Treasury of Eternal Weal and compensate the soul of the person who has
suffered.69
66 Dd. 38.3; see Böklen, Persische Eschatology, p. 58, 59; Pavri, The Zoroastrian
Doctrine of a Future Life, p. 51, 52, 74-77, 100, 102.
67 Sd. 1.3-5.
68 See. Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, p. 313. 69 Sd. 64.9; SdBd. 65.1-5; 71.4,
5.
Heaven

The graduated heavens. The division of heaven, or the celestial realms, into
several mansions of Paradise, as recognized in the Avesta, remains unaltered
in the Pahlavi period. Heaven in general is designated Vahisht, Paradise, but
the divisions of heaven into the domains of Good Thoughts, Good Words,
and [415] Good Deeds, with the highest heaven Garotman, make up the four
chief heavens.70 Endless Light and Best Existence are variants frequently used
for Garotman.71 The several heavens of the celestial world are also known
after the names of their locations in space, and are then called the heavens of
the Star Region, the Moon Region, the Sun Region, and that of Endless
Light.72 A distinction is generally made between the lower heavens and the
highest heaven.73 If one's good deeds are three Sroshocharans more than his
evil deeds he goes to Vahisht, or heaven, but if they are only one Tanapuhar
in weight more than his misdeeds the soul goes to the Best Existence.74 With
the same idea it is said that when ceremonies are not performed for the good
of the soul, it goes to heaven, but when performed it ascends to the highest
Garotman.75 70 Hn. 2.33, 34; Mkh. 2.146; 7.12; 57. 13; AV. 7.1; 8.1; 9.1;
10.l; cf. 2 Corinthians, 12.2.
71 Dd. 1.3; 14.7; 34.3; SLS. 10.26.
72 Bd. 12.l; Dd. 34.3; Mkh. 7.9-11; Dk. vol. 7, p. 461.
73 Bd. 12.1; 30-27; Dd. 14.7; 24.6; 31.4.15, 17, 22, 25; 34.3; Sd. 80.l1.
74 SLS. 6.3.
75 Ib.
If the good deeds are in excess the righteous soul goes to heaven on the
dawn of the fourth day, but if, in addition to the stock of this virtue, he has
chanted the Gathas and thus has extra merit to his credit as a true believer,
he then is transported aloft to Garotman.76 Vohuman welcomes such a
righteous soul, and announces at the command of Ohrmazd, its place and
reward.77 The same archangel thereupon offers the sanctified spirit a cup of
ambrosia to drink,78 and the righteous souls that are in heaven greet it with
joy and pleasure.79
76 Dd. 20.3. 77 Dd. 31.5.
78 Phl. Vd. 19.31.
79 Dd. 31.9.
Location of heavens. The concept of the next world, which was abstract and
spiritual in the Gathic and Later Avestan periods, gradually becomes

concrete and material. The separate heavens as well as hells retain their
names which designate abstract virtues as Good or Evil Thoughts, Words,
and Deeds, but they are now in reality completely materialized. Different
heavens are located in different parts of the cosmos, and a sharply defined
boundary line divides them from one another. The separate heavens, begin
with the Star Region.80 The first heaven, of Good Thoughts, is represented
as extending from the [416] stars to the moon; the second heaven, of Good
Words, commences from the moon and reaches the sun; the third, of Good
Deeds, extends from the sun to the lower limits of Garotman, and the last, or
the highest Garotman, the Best Existence, the abode of Ahura Mazda, is in
the regions of the Endless Light.81
80 Dk.. vol. 9, p. 626.
81 Mkh. 7. 9-12; AV. 7-10.
Nature of heaven. Heaven is exalted, resplendent, most fragrant, and most
desirable.82 It possesses all light, all goodness, all glory, all fragrance, and all
joy.83 It has comfort, pleasure, joy, and happiness that are higher and greater
than the highest and greatest comfort, pleasure, joy, and happiness in this
world. It is devoid of want, pain, distress, and discomfort,84 and it is
luminous, full of charm and full of bliss.85 Just as anything that is unlimited,
imperishable, inconsumable, and everlasting is greater than that which is
limited, perishable, passing, and consumable, so is the felicity of heaven
greater than that of this world.86 The supremest happiness and pleasure in
this world could not bear comparison with the eternal felicities of heaven.87
Sweet-scented breezes like that of basil, continually blow in paradise,
spreading fragrance everywhere.88 The grandeur and beauty are such that the
souls have never seen anything so exquisite in the material world. It is the
residence of Ohrmazd, the archangels and angels, and of the Guardian
Spirits as well as the most blessed among mankind.89
82 Dd. 26.2.
83 Dk., vol. 3, p. 136; AV. 15.21.
84 Dd. 26.3.
85 Dk., vol. 9, p. 626. 86 Dd. 26.5; 31.23, 24.
87 Dd. 31.22.
88 Mkh. 7.15.

89 Dk., vol. 2, p. 80.
Condition of the souls in heaven. The souls in paradise move and perceive,
and feel like the angels and archangels, they are undecaying, undying,
unharmed, untroubled, full of glory, joy, pleasure, and happiness; and enjoy
the fragrant breeze as sweet as the basil.90 The radiance and brightness of the
souls in heaven are like the stars and the moon and the sun, and they sit on
the golden thrones and carpets.91 The beautiful souls are attired in clothings
embroidered with gold and silver and are seated on golden carpets and richly
adorned cushions. Those of [417] women are bedecked with jewelry, and
those of warriors with golden arms and equipment studded with jewelry.92
90 Mkh. 7.13-17; 40.30.
91 AV. 7.2, 3; 8.7; 9.3, 4.
92 Mkh. 2.154, 156; AV. 12.2, 3, 7, 9, 14, 16; 13.1, 2; 14.7-9, 14; 15.9.
Celestial food. The food that is given to the souls of the righteous ones in
heaven as soon as they enter its gates is the ambrosia, the spiritual food of
the angels themselves.93
93 Dd. 31.12-14; Mkh. 2.152, 156; Hn. 2.38, 39.
Duration of heavenly bliss. The souls that have ascended to heaven enjoy
happiness, and remain full of glory forever and ever.94 This state of felicity
continues up to the day of Resurrection.95

94 Mkh. 2.157; 7. 7; 40.30.
95 Dd. 31.25.
HAMISTAGAN
The intermediary place between heaven and hell. It is situated between the
earth and the starry regions.96 According to the belief current in the Pahlavi
period, which dates back to far more ancient times, there is provided a place
for those particular souls in whose case the balance trembles evenly between
good and evil at the bridge owing to the exact counterpoise between
righteousness and sin in the scale into which they have cast their deeds in
the present life.97

96 Mkh. 7.18.
97 Phl. Vd. 7.52; Bd. Modi, op. cit., SLS. 6.2; Dd. 20.3; 24.6; 33.2; Mkh.
12.14; Dk., vol 9, p. 626; AV. 6.7, 11.
The condition of its inmates till the final day of the Renovation. The place
of the Hamistagan resembles this earth.98 The souls that are transported to
this place have no other sufferings than cold and heat.99 Exposed to the
inclemency of weather, they shiver in winter and frost and are scorched in
the tropical summer up to the day of Resurrection.100 Beyond that, however,
the Pahlavi texts speak of no other suffering, and their final fate is postponed
till the universe is restored at the last day of the general restoration of the
world.
98 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 13.
99 Mkh.7.19; AV. 6.12.
100 AV. 6.6, 11, 12.
Hell
Graduated hells. Corresponding to the four heavens or a fourfold division of
heaven, the texts mention four principal [418] hells. These are the Evil
Thought Hell, Evil Word Hell, Evil Deed Hell, and the Worst Existence of
Darkness.101 Sometimes the grades of hell are vaguely spoken of without any
definite number.102
101 Mkh. 2.182, 183; 7.20, 21.
102 Bd. 11; Dd. 20.4; 33.3-5; Dk., vol. 8, p. 448.
Location of hell. The abode of the sinners is in the middle of the earth,103
down below the Chinwad Bridge.104 It is in the northern regions, as in
Avestan times it was also believed to be, and below the surface of the earth,
with its gate on the ridge Arezur, where the demons hold their fiendish
council.105
103 Bd. 3.27.
104 Bd. Modi, op. cit., 1; Dk.. vol. 9, p. 626; AV. 53.2, 3.
105 Phl. Vd. 3.7; Bd. 12.8; Dd. 33.5.
Description of hell. Hell is deep and dreadful, dark and stinking, vile and
grievous, cold and stony, devoid of joy and pleasure, of comfort and

happiness, and full of pain and punishment, filth and stench, misery and
torture.106 It is coldest beyond description in one place and hottest in
another and is full of noxious creatures, stench, and darkness.107 It is
traversed by a gloomy and dreadful river filled by the tears shed by men for
their departed ones.108 The depth of hell is such that its bottom cannot be
reached by a thousand cubits,109 and it is tenanted by the demons, fiends,
and the souls of the damned.110
106 Bd. 28.47; Dd. 27.2-5; 33.2: Dk., vol. 8, p. 449; vol. 9, p. 626; AV. 54. 1.
107 Mkh. 7. 27-31.
108 AV. 16.2, 7.
109 AV. 54.3.
110 Dk., vol.3, p. 135.
Ahriman greets the wicked souls in hell with scorn and mockery. No
sooner is the terrible sentence pronounced upon those destined for perdition
than Vizarsh and other demons pounce upon the wretched souls of the sinful
and put them in heavy chains, and, beating them and mercilessly torturing
them, drag them down to hell.111 The wretched souls now repent of their sins
and exclaim that it would have been better for them if they had not been
born upon the earth.112 The angels give them up to the charge of the
demons, their own conscience deserts them, and thus forsaken and forlorn,
they lament and weep, shout and shriek, gnash their teeth and tear their hair,
mutilate their limbs and lacerate themselves, making moan, and soaking
[419]the ground with a torrent of tears. But all in vain. Unavailing are their
cries and lamentations, for the denizens of heaven seem to be under the spell
of the drowsy fiend, Bushasp, who has lulled them to sleep, and the righteous
souls in heaven seem to have grown callous and indifferent to the pangs of
their former earthly associates. In this frightful condition there is no one to
pity them, and none to cast a look of mercy on them in their disconsolate
condition on the way to the infernal realm. Writhing in suffering and sorrow,
weeping and lamenting and gnashing their teeth, they now enter hell,113 and
with the fourth step of the downward descent to perdition they approach
Ahriman who addresses them with ribald mockery, saying in scornful banter
that it is strange they preferred the gloom and misery of hell to the joy and
happiness of heaven,114 revolted from the will of Ohrmazd, whose bread they
ever ate, and practised the evil of the Evil Spirit.115 The demons and fiends

incessantly rail at the wretched souls and finally hurl them headlong into the
darkest abyss.
111 Dd. 32.4-7; Mkh. 2.164.
112 Dk., vol. 5, p. 279.
113 Mkh. 2.165, 166; cf. Mathew, 8.12; 22.13; 25.30.
114 Mkh. 2.184-186; 7.23-25.
115 AV. 100.2-5.
Punishments and retributive justice. The souls are generally punished by
the particular demon or demons in conformity to whose will the individual
has sinned in this world.116 These fiends take a cruel delight in torturing the
souls for the very sins that they themselves had instigated. The degree of
suffering is exactly proportioned to the transgression, and the form of
punishment meted out corresponds in the same manner to the various crimes
committed in this world. We may select only a few instances from the
elaborate list of Viraf. The one that has slain a pious man is himself killed
over and over again in hell as a punishment.117 He who has eaten unlawfully
without saying grace starves eternally of hunger and thirst.118 The merchant
who used false scales and sold adulterated goods on earth must day and night
in hell measure bushels full of filth and then devour them.119 A tyrant king is
tortured by being flogged by demons with darting serpents.120 A liar and a
slanderer have [420] their tongues ever gnawed by noxious creatures.121 The
law obtains in hell that all demons assail their victims from the front, but the
demon of slander alone attacks from the rear, because a backbiter usually
indulges in secret calumnies in the absence of a person.122 An apostate is
converted into a creature with the head of a man and the body of a
serpent.123 The person who in life has defiled the fire or the water through
some pollution by means of dead matter must in hell continually devour dead
matter.124 The man who withheld food from the dogs in this world has to
offer them bread in plenty in the inferno, but they prefer to devour his flesh
instead; nor do they give him a moment's respite.125 The individual who has
removed the boundary stones of others and usurped their lands has to pay
the penalty of digging a hill with his fingers and of carrying a mountain of
stones on his back.126 One who has ill-treated cattle is ever trodden under
their feet.127 This method of inflicting punishment analogous to the sins is so
systematically carried out that in certain cases where the greater portion of

the body of a sinner is exposed to torture corresponding to the sin a single
limb may be exempted from the punishment, because it served as a medium
of doing some good. For instance, a man whose whole body was either
cooked in the caldron or was undergoing some other torment had one of his
legs stretched out unmolested, because he had either shoved a wisp of hay
before a hungry animal that was tied and could not reach it or killed some
noxious creatures with it.128 He had not done any other good deed his whole
life long. 116 Dd. 14.6; 32.11; Mkh. 21.11, 16, 17, 40, 43, 44.
117 AV. 21.1-5.
118 AV. 23.1-9.
119 AV. 27.1-7; 80.1-7.
120 AV. 28.1-6.
121 AV. 29.1-6; 33.1-6; 66.1-6.
122 Mkh. 2.12.
123 AV. 36.1-7.
124 AV. 38.1-7; 41.1-8.
125 AV. 48.1-7.
126 AV. 49.1-9; 50.1-6.
127 AV. 75.1-6.
128 SLS. 12.29; Sd. 4.3-11; AV. 32.1-6; 60.1-8.
All conceivable forms of physical torture prevail in hell. Viraf recounts the
ghastly spectacle he had witnessed in the vision vouchsafed him of hell. The
various kinds of most hideous tortures in hell are so dreadful that the
torments and sufferings in this world dwindle into insignificance before
them; and the worst of earthly calamities and inflictions present but a feeble
and inadequate counterpart of their terror.129 Nay the memory [421] of the
miseries on earth is the only joy for the unfortunate inmates of hell in
contrast to the torment they have to undergo in the inferno. Viraf relates
that the souls are ever gnawed by snakes and scorpions, worms and other
noxious creatures, flogged with darting serpents as whips in the hands of
demons, suspended head downwards by one leg or by the breasts in the case
of women or, again, trodden under the feet of cattle. Iron spikes and wooden
pegs are driven into their eyes; they are made to stand on hot brass and
compelled to lick a hot oven with their tongues. A brazen caldron is
constantly boiling, and is continually fed by the tens of thousands of
wretched souls flung into it. Miserable as their lot is as they are cooked, it is

made still more miserable by the fact that the fire that burns them never
consumes them. On earth such miserable wretches could have hope that a
merciful death would release them by bringing an end to their sufferings; but
even that one solace is denied to the damned, for though the fire burns them
unceasingly, their souls are equally eternal, and cannot therefore be
annihilated.
129 Dd. 27.5.
Solitude in hell is appalling. One of the miseries that the souls have to
endure in hell is its solitude.130 The souls stand as close to one another as the
ear is to the eye, but each one feels itself alone and solitary; and though the
souls be as many in number as hairs in the mane of a horse, each one feels
that it is lost in solitude, with no eyes to see its sufferings and no ears to hear
its groanings.131 A thousand souls are huddled together in the short space of
a span, and yet every one is ignorant of the presence of others besides itself,
and considers itself thrown out in the wilderness.132
130 Dk.. vol. 7, p. 495.
131 AV. 54.5, 8.
132 Bd. 28.47
Intensity of the darkness and stench of hell. The infernal region is the
abode of all darkness.133 The Avestan texts spoke of hell as the abode of
darkness; in the Pahlavi texts the concept is intensified, and the darkness is
conceived of as being so dense that it can be grasped by hand,134 and the
stench such that it can be cut with a knife.135 All the wood in the world put
on the fire would not emit a smell in this most stinking place.136
133 Dd. 33.4.
134 Phl. Vd. 5.62; 7.22; Mkh. 7.31; cf. Exodus 10.21.
135 Bd. 28.47
136 AV. 54.4.
[422] The foulest food served to the sinners. The most fetid, putrid, and
disgusting kinds of food are given to the sinners in hell,137 and these the
wretched creatures devour in quantities, but yet remain eternally hungry and
thirsty.138 Brimstone and lizard,139 poison and the venom of snakes,
scorpions, and other noxious creatures,140 blood and filth, bodily refuse and

excrement, impurity and menstrual discharge, dust and human flesh, dirt and
ashes, form the variety of dishes that the infernal caterer supplies to the
inmates of hell.141
137 Mkh. 2.190.
138 Dd. 32.8, 9.
139 Bd. 28.48.
140 Mkh. 2.191, 192.
141 AV. 20.1, 2; 23.1-3; 27.1, 2; 35.1, 2; 38.1, 2; 39.1, 2; 46.1, 2; 51.1, 2;
59.1, 2; 83.1; 91.1; 98.1.
Duration of punishment in hell. Mashya and Mashyoi, the first human
couple, broke the divine commandment and lied unto Ahura Mazda; they
were sent to hell, and will remain there until the Renovation.142 When a
convert from Zoroastrianism to some other faith dies, his soul is sentenced to
the sufferings of hell until the day of Resurrection.143 Punishment of long
duration,144 or forever and eternal suffering are the expressions most
frequently met with in connection with the duration of the souls in hell.145
This, however, refers only to the end of the cycle, the period of Renovation,
when the world will be regenerated and all the sinners saved by the
compassionate Lord. Ahura Mazda will not allow even the worst of the
sinners to fall permanently into the hands of the Evil Spirit.146 142 Bd. 15.9.
143 Dd. 41.6.
144 Mkh. 2.186.
145 Dd.13.4; Dk., vol. 2, p. 83; vol. 3, p. 141; vol. 4, p. 264, 270; vol. 6, p.
355, 407; vol. 7, p. 432, 495; Mkh. 2.193; 40.31; AV. 64.13; 87.9.
146 SLS. 8.23; Dd. 75.4; Sg. 4.100, 101; 12.59; Dk., vol. 9, p. 627.
The souls find the time so slowly moving and tedious that when they have
passed only three days and nights in the torments of hell, or sometimes even
a single day, they feel as if nine thousand years had elapsed and as if it were
already time for the day of Resurrection to come and bring them release from
the prison of the inferno.147
147 AV. 18.11; 54.10, 11.
[423]
CHAPTER XLV

THE RENOVATION
Those who further the work of the final restoration. The work of
regenerating the world, which was commenced by Gayomard, the first man,
and was looked forward to from the time of the Gathas, will be brought to
completion and perfection by Soshyos, the last saviour.1 With Gayomard the
curtain rose on the human drama. It will fall with the advent of Soshyos.
Gayomard, Jamshid, Zaratusht, and all pious men who have worked for the
betterment of the universe are among those that help in bringing about the
final renovation.2 The great work proceeds with greater or lesser success
according as mankind are stronger or weaker in the practice of righteousness
at various periods. In two of his visions the prophet sees a tree with four and
seven branches respectively. The branches are made of different metals and
represent the various periods of the religious history of Zoroastrianism. The
first and the golden branch represents the golden age of the faith under King
Gushtasp, the silver and steel boughs symbolize a decadence, while the last,
depicted by the iron branch, or age of the great catastrophe, is the period of
the final overthrow of the empire, the overwhelming cataclysm that
threatened to submerge the world except for the triumph of virtue and right.3
When the mighty work of reclaiming mankind from evil is accomplished,
there will follow the Renovation of the universe.4 Those who work to bring
this period nearer are said to be holding communion with Ohrmazd.5
1 Dk., vol. l, p. 29.
2 Dd. 36.2.
3 BYt. 1.2-5; 2.14-22.
4 Dk., vol. 5, p. 332.
5 Dk., vol. 7, p. 426.
Saviours born immaculately. Ohrmazd sends his special messengers at
various periods of chaos and confusion to save humanity from the clutches of
Ahriman.6 This is clear in the Gathas as in the Younger Avesta. These
Messianic heralds of the real truth to be embodied in the final Soshyos
exemplify righteousness complete and translate the abstract teachings of
[424]religion into concrete actions that thus make the seemingly
incomprehensible intelligible and tangible to the masses. The most
prominent among these leaders in the last three millenniums, as noted
before, are the three sons that are to be born miraculously to Zaratusht, from

his seed through a supernatural conception by a maid, bathing in the waters
of Lake Kans (an idea as old as Yt. 19), and the names of these three ideal
promoters of mankind, as perpetuated in the forms current during the
Pahlavi period, are Hoshedar, Hoshedar-mah, and Soshyos, who will appear
at an interval of a millennium each.7 It is said that Zaratusht went three times
near unto his wife Hvov, and that each time the seed went to the ground.
On each of these three occasions, important for mankind, the spiritual seeds
were caught up by the angel Neryosangh and intrusted to the keeping of
Ardvisur, the divinity of waters, and from these sanctified waters they will be
born in time to come, as miraculously conceived at different periods by three
virgins.8 The advent of the all-beneficent renovators of the faith for the
regeneration of the world will, as we shall see below, be attended with
portents and miraculous signs.
6 Dk., vol. 1, p. 29.
7 Mkh. 2.95.
8 Bd. 32.8.
The millennium of Hoshedar. A child is born to a virgin named Shemik-abu
of the age of fifteen, who miraculously conceives Zaratusht's seed when she
drinks the waters from a pool. The seed was emitted during the lifetime of
Zaratusht and lay concealed in the waters until the maiden kindled the germs
and became pregnant.9 The child thus immaculately born in the first of the
three final millenniums of the world is named Hoshedar, a later modified
corrupt transcript of the Avestan Ukhshyat-ereta. In the first of the last three
thousand years of the world, before the final renovation and the resurrection,
he holds, at the age of thirty, a conference with Ohrmazd and receives a
revelation.10 When he returns from this divine conference, Hoshedar makes
the sun stand still for ten days and nights to convince the people, of the
world about the authenticity of his mission.11 During his millennium,
righteousness, liberality, and all the virtues [425] supreme will be practised
by mankind more and more as the world slowly moves towards perfection
during this aeon. Two-thirds of the people of Iran, according to the Pahlavi
texts, will turn out righteous.12 The wisdom of the religion will constantly
increase,13 the poverty of the people and the slaughter of cattle will
decrease,14 as he is the benefactor that will help to remove the wickedness of
the wolfish nature in mankind.15

9 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.8. 55-57, p. 105, 106.
10 BYt. 3.45; Dk., vol. 8, p. 485.
11 BYt. 3. 45, 46; Dk., vol. 4, p. 247; SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9.2, p. 107, 108.
12 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9.13, p. 110.
13 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9.2, p. 107, 108.
14 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9. -11, p. 108-110.
15 Dk., vol. 1, p. 49; vol. 2, p. 128; vol. 3, p. 133; vol. 6, p. 378.
The millennium of Hoshedar-mah. A maiden named Shapir-abu is destined
to approach the waters and conceive thereby, again through the second seed
of Zaratusht. The virgin who has never approached man gives birth to a
child who is named Hoshedar-mah, an imperfect rendering of the Avestan
Ukhshyat-nemangh,15a who confers with Ohrmazd.16 At the age of thirty
years he announces his advent by making the sun to stand still for twenty
days and twenty nights.17 His benign presence and Messianic power, it is
destined, will destroy the wicked product of every serpentine and monster
engendure.18 Mankind greatly advances toward the realization of the final
goal of perfection during this millennium. Cattle give milk in great
quantities. In connection with this millennial view, it may be added, from the
Pahlavi texts of this later period, that the small cattle which give milk will
give milk then in redoubled quantity, and a cow will give as much milk as
could be used by a thousand men. Hunger and thirst decrease, as the world
reaches nearer to its perfection. A single meal will be sufficient to satisfy a
man for three days.19 Mankind will furthermore become so versed in the art
of healing, and in the science of physical culture, that they will be able to
withstand disease and death more successfully.20 Humility, peace, and
liberality will be now and forever more zealously practised by men.21
15a Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9.18-20, p. 111.
16 Dk., vol. 8, p. 486.
17 Dk., vol. 4, p. 247; SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.9.21, p. 111; 10.2, p. 112, 113.
18 Dk., vol. l, p. 49; vol. 2, p. 128; vol. 3, p. 133; vol. 6, p. 378, 379.
19 Bd. 30.2; Dk.,SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.10.2, p. 112, 113.
20 BYt. 3.53.
21 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.10.3, p. 113.
The millennium of Soshyos. The world, according to the Pahlavi texts,

which carry onward the ideal teachings of Zaratusht [426] in the Gathas as
developed further in the Younger Avesta, is ever striving and tending toward
final betterment, and will reach perfection in the millennium of Soshyos. It
needs only the final touch of this greatest of the renovators to bring about
this result for the eternal welfare of the universe. Men by this time, when
these millennial conditions have been reached, have ceased eating meat, and
subsist on milk and vegetables.22 Even milk, according to the Pahlavi works,
is gradually given up, and water and vegetables form the only food of
mankind.23 The Bundahishn, moreover, adds that, before the Resurrection
and the Renovation of the universe occur, men will give up milk, vegetables,
and even water, and they will ultimately subsist without food of any kind,
and yet not die.24 Still another Pahlavi text states that during the period of
the fifty-seven years of the activity of this last apostle mankind will be able
to subsist for seventeen years simply on vegetables, then thirty on water
alone, and for the last ten years on spiritual food.25 22 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk.
7.10.8, p. 114.
23 Bd. 30.l; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.10.9, p. 114.
24 Bd. 30.3.
25 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.11.4, p. 117.
At this time, according to the texts, when the world is ripe to welcome the
last of the prophets, a virgin named Gobak-abu conceives immaculately the
third seed of Zaratusht in the same manner as her two forerunners had done.
At the age of fifteen she becomes pregnant and gives birth to the most
illustrious Soshyos in the realm of Khvaniras.26 When the final saviour is
thirty years of age, the sun stands still in the zenith of the sky for thirty days
and nights;27 through his supernal power the demoniac nature among men
will be broken.28 He will then cause the Resurrection and the future
existence.29 His body, which is as radiant as the sun, partakes only of
spiritual food and he is clad with kingly glory. Around him he looks with the
power of six eyes and he it is that foresees the end of the Evil Spirit.30 He is
the greatest renovator of the world.31 He comes to restore the dead to life,32
and to bring final perfection to the world.33 26 Bd. 11.6; Dk., SBE., vol. 47,
bk. 7.10. 15-18, p. 115.
27 Dk., vol. 4, p. 247; SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.10.19, p. 116.
28 Dk., vol. 6, p. 379.
29 Bd.11.6; Gs.133.

30 Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.11.2, 3, p. 116, 117.
31 Dk., vol. 7, p. 485.
32 Gs. 133.
33 Dk., vol. l, p. 29.
[427] Any kind of wickedness that may still be lingering, in spite of his
supreme beneficence, will perish through his presence.34 The angels will
enable mankind to co-operate with the great apostle Soshyos to rout Druj.35
In advance of his divine mission to the world he has met Ohrmazd in
conference and has received the supreme sanction for his task.36 During the
fifty-seven years of his work, he will drive out the drujes from the world,37
and will make the world eternally happy.38
34 Dk., vol. l, p. 49; vol. 2, p 128.
35 Dk., vol. 2, p. 111, 112.
36 Dk., vol. 8, p. 486.
37 Ib.
38 Dk., vol. 9, p. 617.
The collaborators of Soshyos. Ohrmazd has ordained that Soshyos will be
helped by certain great persons who have departed from the world, but who
remain immortal and are still living in the body, and are yet to exert sway.
The chief among these personages, potent for the eternal welfare of
mankind, are, Peshyotan, Aghrerat, Parsadga, Urvatadnar, Narsih, Tus, Giv,
Ibairaz, Ashavazd,39 with a thousand others.40 Kaikhusru will arise to help
Soshyos in the raising of the dead;41 Peshyotan, or Chitra-mahan, will lend
help with his hundred and fifty disciples.42 Still another Pahlavi passage
speaks of fifteen men and fifteen women among the living that are to come
to the help of Soshyos.43 They will all leaven the rest of mankind. Zohak,
who is put in chains on Mount Demavand, shall even at the last, break loose
from the bonds in which he has been confined,44 and as a monster-man will
return to the world and disturb the righteous creation.45 At the command of
Ohrmazd, his ministers Srosh and Neryosangh approach the body of
Kersasp and raise it from the dead. The hero then rises up and slays Zohak.46
Soshyos and six of his companions, Roshn-chashm, Khur-chashm, Fradatgadman, Varedat-gadman, Kamak-Vakhshishn, and Kamak-sud, all of which
names have a spiritual significance, [428] will divide the work between them,
and each of them will act in one of the seven zones.47 Every one will

miraculously communicate with the other of his six colleagues in the other
zones. They will read each other's thoughts from a distance and will thus
converse just as two men sitting close together would do.48 The work of the
renovation of the world will last for fifty-seven years, the number already
referred to.49 Full fifty years of this beneficent activity will be devoted to the
seventh zone Khvaniras, where Zaratusht himself was the spiritual chief,50
and where Soshyos himself is working.51 All evil will perish during these
fifty-seven years, and goodness prevail among mankind, and men will
embrace righteousness and zealously practise religion before the final raising
of the dead.52 Disease and death, apostasy and vice, depravity and every
fiendish influence, will perish during this period.53 The world will be restored
to its primal state.
39 Bd. 29.5, 6; Dd. 36.3. 40 Jsp. p. 119.
41 Dd. 36.3; Mkh. 27.59, 63; 57.7; Dk., vol. 7, p. 485; SBE., vol. 47, bk.
7.10.10, p. 114.
42 Dk., vol. 5, p. 275; SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.8.45, 46, p. 104; BYt. 3.27, 29.
43 Bd. 30.17.
44 BYt. 3.55, 56; cf. Revelation, 20.2, 7-10. 45 BYt. 3.57.
46 Bd. 29. 7-9; Dd. 36.3; 37.97; BYt. 3.59-61; Dk., SBE., vol. 47, bk. 7.10.10,
p. 114; vol. 37, bk. 9.15.2, p. 198, 199; Jsp. p. 118, 119.
47 Dd. 36. , 5.
48 Dd.36.6.
49 Bd. 30.7; d. 36.5.
50 Bd. 29.2.
51 Dd. 36.7. 52 Dk., vol. 5, p. 277.
53 Dk., SBE.,vol. 47, bk. 7, 11.4, 5, p. 117.
Resurrection of the dead. The preliminary work of the renovators is to raise
again to life all those who have died from the time of Gayomard, the
primeval man, down to the last man Soshyos, and then give them their
respective bodies.54 It is natural that the world could not at this period be
quite empty of men. Those who happen to be living at the time when the
period of renovation approaches near shall abstain from eating, live without
food, and live so virtuously that even the offspring that are born unto them
at this period will be of spiritual nature. All these, therefore, will be ready to
enter the ranks of the dead who will now receive new bodies.55 54 Dk., vol 5.

p. 332.
55 Dd. 35.1-4.
The dead will be made to rise from the place where they had yielded up their
lives in the world.56 Zaratusht questions Ohrmazd in this connection,
according to the Pahlavi texts, regarding the questions of forming again the
bodies of the dead, inasmuch as the material frames of the dead have
perished and been reduced to dust.57 Ohrmazd, thereupon, tells the prophet
that even as it was possible for him to have created something from nothing,
[429] when nothing at all existed, and as he was able to create the sky and
the earth, the sun and the moon, and the stars, fire and water, clouds and
wind, grain and mankind, in fact everything that formerly had no existence,
it would not be difficult for him at the Resurrection to form anew something
that had already existed.58 Mohammed likewise tells those that doubt, that if
God could create them out of nothing, it was certainly possible for him to
bring them back to life after death. The spirit of the earth, the water, the
plants, and the fire will at that time restore the bones, blood, hair, life, and
other materials which had been committed to them by God in the
beginning, and in this manner the bodies will be formed anew.59 And in
another Pahlavi work it is said that just as it is easier to teach what once was
learnt but was forgotten than it is to teach that which had never been learnt,
and as it is easier to repair a house than to build a new one, even so is it
easier to bring to pass the restoration of the creation than in the beginning
the original creation out of nothing.60 56 Bd. 30.7; SLS. 17.11-14.
57 Bd. 30.4.
58 Bd. 30.5.
59 Bd. 30.6.
60 Dd.37.5.
All those resurrected will be furnished with their bodily frames by the
command of Ohrmazd.61 The first body thus raised up will be that of
Gayomard, the father of mankind. Then will follow the first couple, Mashya
and Mashyoi, and then the rest of mankind, whether righteous or wicked.62
Exceptions to this general statement are found in other Pahlavi texts, but the
tone is in general the same. Men of demoniac nature, sodomites, apostates,
and the hateful Afrasiab will not be given their bodies, for these archenemies of religion are no longer men, but have converted themselves into
fiends and must consequently share the fate of their class.63

61 Dk., vol. 6, p. 359. 62 Bd. 30.7.
63 SLS. 17.7; Dk., vol 3. p. 144.
Universal judgment. A further arraignment at the judgment seat now takes
place. The righteous and the wicked souls are now gathered together in one
place and are subjected to the collective, or universal judgment. Every soul at
this judicial session sees its good and its evil deeds, and the wicked man
becomes as conspicuous as a white sheep among the black.64 Ohrmazd [430]
himself takes a final and decisive account of the souls, and pronounces
definitely upon them, for he remembers in each detail the several individual
judgments passed in connection with every one of the myriads of the wicked
souls after their death, as well as the just.65 From his judgment there is no
appeal. The souls called together in this great and last judicial assembly
recognize each other after the long separation.66 The father sees his son, and
the brother meets his sister, the husband greets his wife, the relative
welcomes his kinsman, and the friend inquires after the experience of his
friend. Everyone eagerly narrates his or her account of the joys or sorrows
during the long period of separation from their comrades of the material
world.67 The wicked ones taunt their righteous friends or relatives with the
bitter reproach that it had not been good on their part to have practised
righteousness themselves, and yet to have left them unwarned in the
indulgence of vice.68 The righteous weep for the wicked, and the wicked
weep for themselves in the midst of this universal mourning while the
righteous are being separated from the wicked and sent back to heaven.69 So
far they had enjoyed bliss and felicity in their spiritual condition, they now
enter heaven in body, and have the satisfaction of seeing even the bodily
grievances of their earthly life adjusted.
64 Bd. 30.10; cf. Jackson, Persia Past and Present, p. 75, New York, 1906.
65 Dd. 14.5.
66 Bd. 30.9.
67 Bd. 30.21,
68 Bd. 30.11.
69 Bd. 30.12, 14, 15.
Bodily punishment. The wicked are now cast back to hell, where they suffer
bodily punishment for three days.70 Hitherto their life in hell was torment of

the spirit, now in the very body that on earth was instrumental in bringing
the spiritual fall of the soul suffers materially. It is said that the wicked soul
suffers three kinds of punishment at three different periods. Firstly, in this
world during the earthly life; secondly, in hell from the night after the
individual's death up to the period of the Renovation in spiritual form; and
thirdly, now for three days in hell in the bodily form.71
70 Bd. 30.13.
71 Phl. Vd. 7.52.
Ordeal of molten metal. The final punishment of being tortured in hell and
burnt in a river of molten metal for three nights, after Ohrmazd's judgment is
given, is in store for the wicked souls. A comet, named Gochihar will fall
from heaven and melt all metals and minerals in the earth, and will burn
[431] up the world in a general conflagration. A boiling flood of the metals
of Shatravar will then flow over the earth,72 and the righteous as well as the
wicked souls will be made to pass into it.73 In this glowing flood the wicked
souls will be purged of their sins, so that they become wholly purified,74
while the righteous will feel as if they were walking in warm milk.75 The
torture of the worst' sinners, such as Zohak, Afrasiab, and the rest, during
these three nights is more intense than that of all others.76 This final
conflagration brings freedom of the sinners from the prison of hell.77
72 Bd. 30.18, 19; cf. Revelation, 8.10; 9.1.
73 Jsp. p. 119, 120.
74 Bd. 30.20; Dd. 32.12, 13; 37.110, 111; Mkh. 21.10.
75 Bd. 30.20.
76 Bd. 30.16.
77 Dk., vol. 2, p. 104; vol. 8. p. 476.
The righteous and the wicked shall no longer remain as divided, but unite
into one. Then, following the great conflagration, there will be the final
renovation of the world. The sinners who have been thus purified and
purged of their sins by the fiery metal become worthy of eternal bliss;78 and
that final punishment will absolve them of their sins.79 The entire creation of
Ohrmazd now becomes virtuous.80 The wicked no longer remain wicked,81
but become righteous.82 The angels under whose influence they had done
good deeds in the world approach them and give joy to them in the

proportion of these good deeds.83 The happiness of the souls that were
already righteous is far greater than that of the wicked who had been
cleansed through torture and punishment.84 The erring children are now
restored to the bosom of the Heavenly Father, and Ohrmazd now takes back
the entire creation to himself.85
78 Dd. 14.8; Dk., vol. 5, p. 332; vol. 9, p. 627.
79 Dk., vol. 6, p. 421.
80 Dk., vol. 7, p. 458, 469.
81 Phl. Vd. 7.52.
82 Dd. 32.14.
83 Dd. 32.15.
84 Ib., 16.
85 Dk., vol. 12, bk. 6.279, p. 7.
The removal of the imperfection of the material bodies of men. The
completion of heavenly bliss requires that it be everlasting. The human soul
is immortal, but the body is not so. Therefore Soshyos and his companions
prepare through an Izishna ceremony a nectar from the fat of the ox
Hadhayosh [432] and the white Hom juice, through a draught of which all
beings become immortal forever and everlasting.86 Every one is given an
immortal body and becomes as innocent in nature as cattle.87 The entire
good creation is henceforth immortal.88 Any one who was a full grown man
when he had died is given the appearance of a man of forty years of age; and
those who died at an early age are given the stature of a youth of fifteen
years.89 Husbands and wives united with their children live together, even as
they lived and acted in this world, but there is no begetting of children.90
Their existence in paradise is accompanied by the full enjoyment of their
reward for ever and ever.91 Those that had not given clothes as a righteous
gift in the world and were now consequently without clothes themselves are
provided with garments by the angels.92 They are hungerless and thirstless,
undecaying and undying, undistressed and ever-beneficial.93 Neither a blow,
nor a knife, nor a sword, nor a club, nor a stone, nor an arrow hurts the body,
for it is now perfected and is immune from pain of any sort.94 Bodily ailments
have vanished.95 The portals of eternal bliss are now flung open to the whole
humanity.96

86 Bd. 19. 13; 30.25; Dd. 37.119.
87 Dk., vol. 1, p. 50; vol. 6, p. 421.
88 Dk., vol. 4, p. 204; vol. 7, p. 472. 89 Jsp. p. 120.
90 Bd. 30.26.
91 Bd. 30.27.
92 Bd. 30.28; cf. 2 Corinthians 5.2-4; Revelation 3.4, 5; 6.11; 7.9; 19.8.
93 Dd. 37.119.
94 Dd. 37.122-125.
95 Dk., vol. 4, p. 234.
96 Dk., vol. 5, p. 332.
The last decisive battle between the forces of good and evil. Then will
follow the last and decisive battle of the eternal war between the rival armies
of Ohrmazd and Ahriman. Every one of the good spirits will combat with his
adversary, and in every case the success will be on the side of the good.
Ohrmazd assails Ahriman, Vohuman seizes on Akoman, Artavahisht on
Indar, Shatravar on Sovar, Spandarmad on Taromat or Naonghas. Khurdad
and Amardad on Tairev and Zairich, Truth on Falsehood and Srosh on
Eshm.97 Druj will perish.98 Hell itself is burnt out. Ohrmazd comes down to
the world and acts as the [433] Zota, sacrificial priest, together with Srosh as
his Raspi, and holds the sacred thread-girdle in his hands. The holy formulas
confound the Evil Spirit, who, now impotent, rushes back to darkness by the
same passage through which he had come out at the beginning of creation.99
97 Bd. 30.29.
98 Dk., vol. 6, p. 421.
99 Bd. 30.30.
Demon and fiend, deceit and falsehood, strife and anger, hatred and illtemper, pain and disease, want and greediness, shame and fear, all perish.100101
Evil of every kind disappears, and good of every kind is perfected.102
Ohrmazd at last becomes completely predominant,103 and his Kingdom of
Righteousness is built upon the earth. 100-101 Dd. 37.120, 121.
102 Dd. 37.122.
103 Dd. 7.3.
Humanity attunes its will to the will of Ohrmazd. All men now become of
one will104 and remain of one accord in the faith of Ohrmazd,105 giving voice
in song to the Glory of their Lord.106 On no account will their will be in
conflict with the divine will, but will ever coincide with it.107 They now live

in the blessed company of Ohrmazd,108 and work to exalt his glory.
104 Dd. 37.127.
105 Dk.. SBE.,vol. 47, bk. 7. 11.6, p. 117.
106 Bd. 30.23.
107 Dk., vol. 5, p. 332.
108 Dk., vol. 8, p. 436.
[434 is blank]
[435]

A PERIOD OF DECADENCE
FROM THE SEVENTH TO THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

[436 is blank]
[437]
CHAPTER XLVI
DOWNFALL OF THE SASANIANS, AND THE AFTERMATH
Iran sinks before the hordes of Arabs. The death of Khusru Parviz, who had
waged the last war in the standing rivalry with the West, heralded the
collapse of the Persian empire. The death-knell of the national greatness had
been struck when with the advent of the weak kings on the throne the
commanders, who felt the allegiance of the army to them rather than to the
person of the king, persuaded the army to revolt. Rival princes strove to
assert their respective rights to the throne. Court intrigues and strifes became
rife. The long wars with the Romans in the far West and the Eastern hordes

near at home, whose inroads were facilitated by the unfavourable
geographical position of Persia, had exhausted the national resources. Famine
and plague had extended their ravages over the whole country. Unbridled
luxury, with all its concomitant vices, was imported from foreign lands, and
the simplicity of life inculcated by Zarathushtra and zealously upheld by the
Dasturs was abandoned. The masses did not escape the contagion of the
luxury and vice of the nobility, and the love of simplicity was replaced by a
feverish worship of pleasure. The simple habits fostered by agricultural
pursuits were on the wane; and the entire social fabric of Iran was seriously
dislocated. The springs of patriotism were sapped, and the bravery with
which the Persians of old had faced their national foes was weakened. The
age of valour had given place to an age of weakness and decay. These causes
aggravated the downfall of Iran and foreshadowed the coming catastrophe,
and there was none to come out as a saviour in this the darkest period of the
nation's agony, so as to avert the impending ruin. In the midst of this chaos
and confusion, Yazdagard III, the last of the illustrious house of Sasan, sat on
the tottering throne.
Since Zoroaster founded his religion, Persia played her conspicuous [438]
part as one of the mightiest empires of the world in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
During this long period when mighty empires rose and fell and great events
in human history took place, the peninsula of Arabia harboured a vast
population that led its uneventful, independent life. The pastoral people
were divided into innumerable tribes always at war with one another. These
sons of the desert were generous and hospitable, active and of rugged virtues.
They were inured to fatigue and scorching rays of the sun. They made
predatory excursions upon neighbouring peoples. Internal feuds kept them
divided.
On a sudden, the greatest and most marvellous revolution of human history
overtook Arabia, which soon changed the history of mankind. Arabia gave a
great prophet to the world. Mohammed united the discordant, warring tribes
into one people and bound them with one common religious and political
bond. He breathed new life into the multitude and made them conscious of
their power. He leavened the masses, elevated their morals, taught them a
higher form of worship, and instilled in them a sense of the dignity of human
nature. He inspired them with religious fervour and animated them with

burning enthusiasm for one mighty cause, the spread of Islam. To their
traditional warlike zeal, he added religious enthusiasm and this combination
made them irresistible. They fought with fiery zeal, reckless valour, and
fanatic fury. They broke the mightiest empires of the world and changed the
destinies of mankind.
Pulsating with the vigour and zeal of youth, and frenzied by the sudden rise
of fortune, the host of these formidable foes overran Iran in the first half of
the seventh century; and the decisive battles of Qadisiya and Nihavand
sealed her fate. The Kingly Glory that had guarded the fortunes of the
nation had flown away, and the star of Islam had risen. The Crescent
superseded the Kava banner, Shahinshah was followed by Caliph, Ohrmazd
was replaced by Allah. Zaratusht gave place to Mohammed, the Koran
supplanted the Avesta, and the thrilling cry of the Muazzin from the minaret
of the mosque drowned the intonations of the Mobad at the altar in the firetemple and proclaimed; God is great. There is no God but God, and
Mohammed is the prophet of God.
Persecution and conversion. The Iranian nation now broke into pieces.
There was not the remotest chance of its ever [439] rising to power again.
Confusion and chaos became rampant. The sufferings wrought on the
faithful by the conquering hordes defy description. Tens of thousands
embraced Islam, and threw in their lot with the conquerors to find relief
from the persecution that raged around them. Many went over to the new
faith because it enabled them to preserve their power and influence. Others
became converts, because conversion brought to them exemption from the
payment of the poll-tax. Similar causes contributed to the conversion of the
Zoroastrians to Islam in the course of successive centuries. Many embraced
Islam under the influence of Abu Muslim during the eighth century. The
Samanid dynasty (a.d. 874-999) is named after Saman, a Zoroastrian noble of
Balkh. He claimed his descent from the famous warrior Bahram Chaubin. He
gave up his faith for the religion of Mohammed. The Zoroastrian king of the
Qabusiyya dynasty adopted Islam at the beginning of the ninth century. The
influence of Daylam brought many Zoroastrians to Islam during the end of
the ninth century. The Zoroastrian poet named Mahyar gave up his ancestral
religion under the influence of his Mohammedan poet friend who had
instructed him in the art of poetry. Those that were more devoted to the

national faith resolved to stick to it at any cost. In this they were imitating
their prophet who, when tempted by Ahriman to renounce the good
Mazdayasnian religion, had said that he would not do so even to save his
body or his life.1 The inevitable had come, but they could not afford to
resign themselves to it. If they fostered the spirit of resignation and despair,
they would be wiped away from the surface of the earth in the intense
struggle for existence. Zoroastrianism inspired them from within to assert
themselves, even in the face of disheartening obstacles of such magnitude
and the fear of coming calamities that were ever imminent. If Ahriman had
reduced them to such an abject state, it was cowardice to succumb to his
doing. It was heroic to revolt against it. 1 Vd. 19.7.
The frequent ravages caused by the inroads of the Tartar and Turk, Mongol
and Afghan hordes added to the hardships of the Iranians. Persecutions
checkered their progress. Century after century their number decreased by
repeated conversions to Islam. When Agha Mohammed Khan, the founder
of the Qajar [440]dynasty, laid a siege to Kerman during the end of the
eighteenth century, there were about twelve thousand Zoroastrian families in
that city alone. About a thousand families have come over to India during
the last century. There are about three thousand families left in Iran to-day.
Writing to their coreligionists in India in the fifteenth century, they
complain that ever since the overthrow of the empire they are living under
such troublesome times that the atrocities of a Zohak, or an Afrasiab, or an
Alexander, pale before what they have been suffering for nine centuries.2
The unfortunate people were denied freedom of thought, safety of life and
property, and human justice up to the end of the last century. They retired
within themselves, and struggled to eke out an unhappy existence. They
slept smarting under the indignities inflicted on them during the day, were
haunted by the spectre of persecution in their dreams, and awoke in the
morning with gloomy thoughts of the impending morrow. At best they were
suffered to exist, they could not live humanly. This was the veritable iron age
of Zoroastrianism and its followers, spoken of in the Bahman Yasht.
Zoroastrianism had struggled for its very existence during this period in
Persia, and its followers during such troublesome times had to practise their
religious rites by stealth.
2 Patell, Parsi Prakash, vol. I., p. 6, Bombay, 1888.

Almost every vestige of Iranian scholarship perishes. The literary edifice of
Iran had crumbled along with the empire, after the invasion of Alexander the
Great. What little the nation was able to restore during the Sasanian period
fell now once more before the devastating fury of the Arabs. Iranian culture
never truly emerged from the shock of this final blow. Many of the most
famous writers who have contributed to the Arabic literature and science
were themselves Zoroastrian converts to Islam or descendants of those who
had embraced Islam in earlier days. We look in vain in the extant Pahlavi
literature for the literary works of merit on secular subjects by the
Zoroastrian writers. These have evidently perished. We meet with occasional
attempts on the part of the priests to save the literary tradition from
extinction. The fall of the Umayyads and the ascendency of the Abbasid
Caliphs in 749, by the help of the Persians, succeeded in supplanting the
Arab supremacy by a Persian power. The Abbasids owed their elevation to
the throne to the [441]Persians, who now rose to power and influence.
Persian method of administration, and Persian food, dress and music
prevailed at the royal court and among the people. The observance of the
Nuruz, the festival of the New Year, was introduced. Ministers of Persian
extraction came to the head of affairs. A noble Persian family, known to
history, as the Barmicide, descended from Barmak, who was the high-priest
of the great fire-temple of Navbahar at Balkh, remained in power for over
fifty years (a.d. 752-804) and wisely directed the affairs of the Caliphate.
The Zoroastrians got a favourable opportunity of peacefully conducting their
literary activities; and some of the important Pahlavi works that have come
down to us were produced during this period, more particularly in the reign
of al-Mamun, (a.d. 813-833). After that era the literary activity appears to
have been arrested, for no original works were produced that can be assigned
to the period following. The work of copying manuscripts, however, was
carried on up to modern times, and it is owing to the zealous activity of
faithful adherents to the cause that the ancient works have reached us.
A glimpse into the religious life of the Iranians during the centuries that
followed. From this period onward we have very little knowledge of the
religious life of the stray remnants of Zoroastrians in Persia. The
insufficiency of the data prevents us from forming any very clear opinion
about their beliefs. What little information we have of this period comes

mostly from the Mohammedan writers.
Masudi wrote about a.d. 950 that Avesta came as revelation from heaven.
Zend is commentary. Those who differed from the Avesta were called
Zendiks, because they based their statements on the Zend rather than the
original Avesta. Al-Biruni, who flourished about a.d. 1000, gives some
scattered information on miscellaneous matters of religious practice, which
he gathered from the Zoroastrians of his day. We shall select some points of
interest from his description. The angel Srosh, he notes, is spoken of as the
most powerful angel against the sorcerers, and he visits the world three times
during the night to rout them. It was Srosh who introduced the practice of
Zam-zama, that is, reciting one's prayers with closed lips and emitting
inarticulate sounds or in bAj, as the Zoroastrians do to this present day.
Artavahisht, as the genius of fire and light, watches [442]over mankind, he
says, and heals diseases with drugs, but besides this, as the genius who
presides at the ordeal by fire, distinguishes a truth-speaking man from a liar.3
We have already seen that by the end of the Pahlavi period the sharp
distinction between man's soul and his Farohar was forgotten, and both were
regarded as one and the same. Commenting upon the observance of the
Fravardigan festival, or the days set apart for the propitiation of the Farohars,
in his own time, al-Biruni says that the Zoroastrians believed that the souls of
the dead, both righteous and wicked, descended to the earth during these
ten days. They, therefore, fumigated the house with juniper, and put dishes
of food and drink on the roofs of their houses, in the pious expectation that
the souls would inhale their savour and receive nourishment and comfort.
The pious souls, moreover, assumed invisible forms, dwelt among their
relatives, and took part in their affairs.4 Spandarmad, he observes, is the
guardian of the earth and of chaste women who are devoted to their
husbands. On the fifth day of the twelfth month, both of which take their
names after this archangel, the author says people write a charm on three
pieces of paper to scare away the noxious creatures and fix them on three
walls of their house.5 The custom lingers in some Parsi families in India up to
this day. People get a Pahlavi incantation written by the priests, preferably in
red, and stick it to the front door of their houses. Zoroastrianism never
enjoined days of fast, and we have already seen from the Pahlavi works that
fasting was regarded a sin. The injunction not to fast seems to have been
faithfully followed, for al-Biruni attests that he who observed a fast was

compelled to feed some needy persons by way of expiation for his sin.6
Zoroastrians were generally called fire-worshippers. Firdausi admonishes his
coreligionists on the point and asks them not to speak of the Zoroastrians as
fire-worshippers because they were the worshippers of one holy God.
Kazwini, writing about a.d. 1263, says that Zoroaster made the fire a Kibla
and not a god.7
3 Chronology, tr. Sachau. p. 204, London, 1879.
4 Ib., p. 210.
5 Ib., p. 216.
6 Ib., p. 217.
7 Cosmography, ii. p. 267. ed. Wustenfeld, Gottingen, 1848.
We have already seen that the religious dissensions during the Parthian and
Sasanian periods had racked the Zoroastrian [443] world. Sects and heresies
had sprung up in consequence. Several of these flourished in Iran for
centuries after the downfall of the Persian empire. Shahristani (a.d. 10861153) in his Book of Sects attests the existence of some of these in his times.
The more prominent of these were the Mazdakites, Zarvanites, and the
Gayomarthians. The latter sect, about which we hear for the first time,
evidently derived its name from Gayomard, the primeval man. The followers
of this sect, we are told, believe in an eternal being who is called Yazdan.
This first principle, it is said, existed when there was nothing beside him; he
entertained a thought in his mind on the probability of the origin of an
adversary. This evil thought originated Ahriman, the spirit of darkness. Ever
since the manifestation of this evil one, there goes on a fierce war between
the powers of light and darkness.8
8 Haarbriicker, Religionspartheien und Philosophenschulen, 1, p. 276, 277, Halle,
1850.
This appears to be still another attempt to palliate dualism which has ever
been the crux of Zoroastrianism. The question comes up time after time and
was the cause of many sectarian divisions among the believers. Mohammed
strongly urges the unity of God. He preaches rigid monotheism. Iblis or
satan, in his system, is a fallen angel and, unlike Ahriman, owes his existence
to God. Worshipping two gods must have been the taunt hurled at the
doctors of the Zoroastrian Church by the Moslem divines. Those among the
Mazdayasnians who seem to have viewed dualism as a flaw in their religious
system apparently endeavoured to give it a monistic form by declaring that

Yazdan originated Ahriman.
The Zoroastrian author of the Ulama-i Islam, a controversial treatise in
Persian, written in about the fourteenth century, acquaints us with the
different opinions held in his own day, to account for this ever-recurring
problem. Himself a Zarvanite, the author attests the existence of several
different sects, who variously held that both Ohrmazd and Ahriman have
originated from Time, or that Ohrmazd himself permitted evil to exist in
order that his goodness might be better appreciated, or that Ahriman was a
reprobate angel who revolted from Ohrmazd.9
9 Tr. Vullers, p. 52, Bonn, 1831; tr. Blochet, p. 22, Paris, 1898.
A Persian treatise entitled Siwar-i Akalim-i Sab'ah, or [444] Sketches of Seven
Countries, composed at the beginning of the fifteenth century, states that the
Magi believe God and Iblis to be two brothers. A thousand years of the
world are a cycle of God, and a thousand of Satan.10
10 Eng. tr. by Yohannan and Jackson in JAOS., vol. 28, p. 183-188.
The Rivayat literature, a collection of questions and answers on ritual
observances exchanged between the Parsis of India and their coreligionists in
Persia, between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries, enables us to gain an
insight into the theological beliefs of the Zoroastrians of Persia during that
time, and as these Rivayats were compiled in India, we shall recur to them
when we discuss the Indian period.
The Zoroastrian community in Persia, during these centuries lay steeped
in the grossest ignorance and darkness. Although the condition of the
Zoroastrians in their fatherland had been growing more and more precarious,
they still had succeeded, amid chaos and confusion, in maintaining for a
considerably long time their superiority over their Indian coreligionists in
the knowledge of their sacred literature. We shall see in the subsequent
pages how the Indian Parsis had to look to the Iranians for enlightenment in
religious matters. The learned Iranian Mobad Jamasp, who came from
Kerman to Surat in 1721, found the state of the intelligence of the
Zoroastrian priests in India so low that he resolved to impart religious
instruction to some of the leading high priests during the period of his stay
in the land. The Dasturs of Surat, Navsari, and Broach consequently became
his disciples;11 and the first of these, Dastur Darab, later became the teacher
of Anquetil du Perron. But the times later changed. Zoroastrian scholarship

could not thrive in Persia, as it was able to do under the conditions in India.
The mother-country to-day has to look to her thriving children living in
India for religious instruction, and for masters from the adopted land able to
teach the Zoroastrian Persians themselves, as Persia has not been in a
position for more than a hundred years to give any real instruction to the
Indian Parsis, or to produce any literary work that could throw light on their
sacred books. Zoroaster's teachings had, for a century, been losing their hold
upon the community of the faithful in Iran. When the representative of the
Society for the [445] Amelioration of the Zoroastrians in Persia, founded by
the munificence of the Parsis of India, first visited Persia in the middle of the
last century, he found persons of full age living without the sacred shirt and
girdle, the indispensable marks of a Zoroastrian. He saw them smoking
tobacco without any compunction. Superstition had been rampant.
11 Patell, Parsi Prakash, vol. 1, p. 23, 24, Bombay, 1888.
It was manifest the pristine purity of the faith had departed with the
greatness and glory of the Iranian nation. The sacred fire, kindled by the
holy prophet in the remote past, was still there, it is true, but the demon Az
had stretched his icy hands to extinguish it, leaving the fire of Ohrmazd only
smouldering in ashes upon the altar. Nevertheless, though shorn of its innate
radiance, its sparks were not quenched, and its ashes were still hot; only a
Tansar or an Adarbad was needed to fan it into flame.
Such has been the tale of sorrow and suffering of the group that chose to
remain behind their enterprising coreligionists who engendered by a spirit of
adventure, set sail for India and planted their colonies in Gujarat. Different is
the story that the Indian group has to tell us. It is one of phenomenal
progress, unprecedented prosperity, social regeneration, and religious
revival. To this we shall now turn.
[446]
CHAPTER XLVII
EXODUS TO INDIA
The Deva-worshippers of India greet the Daeva-abjurers of Iran. After the
collapse of the house of Sasan, several hundreds of the adventurous people,
not finding any human court in which to lodge their complaints, resolved to

abandon their fatherland in quest of a more peaceful home, where they could
practise their faith with a liberty of conscience so ruthlessly denied them by
their conquerors. A burning passion for their ancient home and love for
liberty of conscience clashed. The latter conquered and a noble band of
Iranian exiles now streamed to India in successive waves. Here they found an
asylum. India, the land of the devas, magnanimously welcomed the fugitives
of Iran, whose religion had branded their devas as evil. The fire of Ohrmazd
found a hospitable hearth in the new land which the early Parsi settlers
adopted as their home. The Parsi athravan tended his sacred fire, even as the
Hindu atharvan did his in the next street. The Parsi Mobad performed the
Yasna ceremony and squeezed the Haoma plant, as his Hindu Brahman
neighbour practised his Yajnya rites and pounded Soma.
Reviling each other's gods, yet living peacefully together. We have already
seen that the points of difference between the religious beliefs of the two
nations are as many as are the points of resemblance between them. This is
seen in the daily practices of the two peoples. The Hindu rises in the
morning to begin his day's work with the devout utterance of the devas on
his lips, the Parsi leaves his bed cursing them. One invokes them with his
uplifted hands, the other lashes them with his sacred girdle. The Hindu
anathematizes the asuras as the infernal beings, the Parsi pays his homage to
the ahuras as the celestial beings. Such is the manner in which the Indian and
Iranian branches of the Aryan family have behaved towards each other for a
thousand years in India where they met each other once more after the long
ages of separation.
[447] A period of literary arrest. The unsettled times that followed the first
settlement of the Parsis in India were unfavourable to literary activity.
Centuries full of hardships intervened before Zoroastrianism gained a real
foothold in India and secured for its adherents some means of livelihood in
this new country of their adoption. Severe was the struggle and terrible was
the trial of the faithful throughout the vicissitudes of all this early period.
Poverty, an insurmountable barrier to progress of any kind, haunted the
faithful followers of Zoroaster for a long time. When we look at the
condition of the times, it is no wonder that the literary movement among the
Parsis was arrested for a considerable interval before these emigrants

succeeded in adapting themselves to the changed circumstances in which
they were placed. Religious knowledge orally transmitted from generation to
generation, however, kept alive the native tradition; but no written works
have come down to us of this period. With our slender resources we are
unable to ascertain the precise scope of the literary activity of the first five or
six centuries of Parsi settlement in India.
Pahlavi studies. After an absolute blank extending over a period of three
centuries, we come across the only literary composition of this period in the
form of the Pahlavi inscriptions in one of the Kanheri caves near Bombay,
which record the two visits of some Parsi travellers in 1009 and 1021 a.d.1
Pahlavi seems to have long remained the literary language of the learned
Zoroastrian priests in India; and the traditional knowledge of the language
had not become extinct. Though the insufficiency of data prevents us from
saying anything with certainty, we cannot be wide of the truth when we say
that a number of learned priests had with unflagging zeal kept the torch of
Iranian scholarship burning. The masterly Sanskrit version of the Pahlavi
texts done in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries is an eloquent evidence of
this.
1 West, The Pahlavi Inscriptions at Kanheri in Indian Antiquary, 9. 265-8, Bombay,
1880.
Parsi-Sanskrit literature. Some of the Parsi scholars, who frequently came
into contact with the learned Brahmans, seem to have adopted Sanskrit, the
learned language of the land, for their literary productions. The extant Parsi
literature produced in this tongue comprises the translation into Sanskrit of
the [448] greater part of the Avestan Yasna, Khordah Avesta, and Aogemadaecha, based on their Pahlavi versions; also a Sanskrit translation of the
Pahlavi works Menuk-i Khrat, Shikand Gumanik Vijar, and Arda Viraf
Namah, and the Sanskrit version of the Pazend Ashirvad [asirvad]. The most
illustrious representative of this group of Parsi Sanskritists is Neryosangh
Dhaval, who flourished about 1200 a.d. He has been one of the most
eminent doctors of the Parsi church in India, and has made the versions of
the major portion of the Zoroastrian work that has come down to us
accompanied by a Sanskrit version. We shall not pause here to consider the
question of the literary merit of this particular form of the literature, as that

lies beyond the pale of the present work. As the Sanskrit works are merely
the faithful translations of the Pahlavi texts, and not any original
compositions, we look in vain in them for any side-information on the
religious thought of this period. What we do find from them is the fact that
the religious studies were prosecuted with great zeal at this period, and that
the knowledge of Avestan in general, and of Pahlavi and Sanskrit in
particular, among the learned clerics was of a superior order.
[449]
CHAPTER XLVIII
ZARTUSHT DURING THE PERSIAN PERIOD
The birth and childhood and youth of Zartusht. The Persian and Arabic
writers use Zartusht, and similar variations for the prophet's name. Following
the Pahlavi tradition, they place the date of his birth at about three hundred
years before Alexander. His mother's family, they say, came from Rai. He
arose somewhere in Azarbaijan and passed the active life of his ministry at
Balkh.1 Several Arabic and Persian works have allusions to Zartusht. The one
work, however, which exclusively treats of the life of the prophet is the
Persian Zartusht Namah, composed in verse by Zartusht Bahram in the
thirteenth century. The author derives his information from the Pahlavi
sources.2 The writers of this period relate that when Ohrmazd created the
spirit of Zartusht, he attached it to a tree. In later ages, a cow belonging to
the person destined to be the fortunate father of the coming prophet
happened to eat the dry leaves of the tree. The owner of the cow partook of
her milk and the consequence was that his wife conceived the child Zartusht.
The creator had thus ordained that the couple might shelter the child as two
shells would cover a pearl. When five months had elapsed Doghduyah, for
that was the name of the mother, saw in a dream that a dark cloud had
enveloped her house and noxious creatures fell from it. They tore out the
child from the womb and were ready to destroy it and the mother was going
to scream in terror. But Zartusht at once consoled her that nothing untoward
would happen because the almighty befriended him. A brilliant mountain,
thereupon, descended and rent asunder the black cloud and the noxious
creatures disappeared. A radiant youthful form holding a luminous branch,

representing Farrah-i Izad or the Glory of God, and a book sent by God in his
hand, emerged from the mountain. He restored the child to the mother and
comforted [450] her that no harm would befall the child, for God himself
guarded it. He added, while departing, that the auspicious child would grow
to be the prophet of Ohrmazd.3
1 See Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 13, 161-167, 192, 195, 197-205.
2 GIrPh. 2.122, 123.
3 Shahrastani, tr. Haarbrücker, 1.276, f. ZtN. p. 480-483; Mirkhond, History
of the Early Kings of Persia, tr. Shea, p. 286; Dabistan, 1.212-218; Gottheil,
References to Zoroaster, p. 48.
At the moment of his birth, Zartusht laughed aloud.4 The story reached the
ears of the magician Durasarun, who hastened to the house of Purshasp and
raised his sword to cut off the child's head but that instant his hand withered
away. He then ordered the child to be thrown into a pile of kindled wood,
naphtha, and sulphur, but the devouring flame became as cool as water and
the child was saved by Ohrmazd. Then the wizard threw the child into a
thoroughfare for the passage of oxen but a leading cow took the child
between her forefeet and drove off all that came near, with her horns. Then
Zartusht is exposed in a narrow defile through which horses passed. A mare
at once stood at the child's head and saved it from being trampled to death.
In the fourth attempt to destroy the child, it is put in a den of ravening
wolves. When a wolf rushed to devour Zartusht, his mouth was sewn up.
The wolves were alarmed and sat near the head of Zartusht like nurses. Two
sheep came to the spot and applied their teats to the lips of Zartusht. The
sheep and the wolves all remained peacefully near him.5
4 Shahrastani, tr. Haarbrücker, 1.277; ZtN. p. 483; Mirkhond, tr. Shea, p.
286; Dabistan, 1. 218, 219; Gottheil, References, p. 49.
5 ZtN. p. 484-487; Dabistan, 1, 219-221.
Zartusht is placed under the care of a sage for instruction.6 At the age of
seven, Zartusht fell ill and the magicians went to his house with medicine.
Zartusht was asked to swallow the medicine, and was told that it would
deliver him from pain. Through divine aid Zartusht knew that it was poison.
He poured it on the ground and rebuked them.7
6 ZtN. p. 488; Db. 1, 224, 225.
7 ZtN. p. 488, 489; Db., p. 227.
The magicians were held in high honour in those days and Purshasp, the

Persian writers say, was also under their influence. One day he invited them
to a feast at his house and when the feast was over spoke in praise of their
work. Zartusht, thereupon, told his father that he should abandon the
erroneous path of the wizards and turn to God for inspiration. The
magicians, he added, would find their abode in hell when they died.
Purshasp [451] was much incensed at these words and heated discussions
ensued between him and Zartusht. Purshasp and the magicians were
vanquished by the future prophet. The magicians left the house in confusion
and disgrace. They fell ill and soon hurried along to the abode of
retribution.8
8 ZtN. p. 489, 490; Db., 1.227-229.
When Zartusht reached the age of fifteen he gave up attachment to worldly
things and engaged himself in holy meditation in seclusion. Day and night
he laboured in the service of the Almighty. He fed the hungry, clothed the
naked, and helped the needy. A glory shone round him owing to his pious
life of austerity and his fame spread among all people.9
9 Mirkhond, tr. Shea, p. 283; Db. 1.229.
Zartusht receives revelation. At the age of thirty, one day Zartusht was
returning with his relations and companions towards Iran. They came to a
large expanse of water and there was no boat. He invoked God's help and
crossed over the water in such a way that the water moistened only the soles
of their feet. He then met the archangel Bahman to whom he expressed his
heart's desire. Bahman asked him to close his eyes. On opening the eyes,
Zartusht found himself in the midst of the heavenly beings waited on by
celestial virgins. The angels greeted him and he conversed with God, who
taught him all sciences and everything from the beginning of creation to the
end of time. Upon Zartusht's request Ohrmazd showed him Ahriman in his
gloomy abode. When the Prince of Darkness beheld Zartusht, he asked him
to turn away from the religion of Ohrmazd and promised to grant all his
earthly desires. Zartusht was then made to pass successfully through the
ordeals. On Zartusht's asking him about the symbol of religion, Ohrmazd
said that the most excellent emblem was light, from which he had created
the entire good creation. Wherever there was any luminous object it was the
effulgence of his divine light. He instructed Zartusht in the Avesta and asked
him to recite the texts of the book to king Gushtasp. Each of the other

archangels then asked Zartusht to exhort mankind to preserve the material
creation under his special charge.10
10 Masudi, Prairies d’or, 2, p. 153, tr. Barbier de Meynard; ZtN. p. 490-497;
Db., 229-243.
Zartusht at the court of king Gushtasp. Zartusht now turned his steps
towards the court of Gushtasp, when the Prince [452] of Darkness accosted
him on the way with his evil associates. He asked the prophet of Ohrmazd
to conceal the Avesta and turn away from preaching the new faith. Zartusht,
in reply, recited a chapter of the Avesta, which confounded the evil brood.
Some fled, some dropped dead, and some pleaded for mercy. On his way
further, Zartusht met two tyrant chiefs and he asked them to embrace his
religion. They heeded not his words. Thereupon Zartusht invoked Ohrmazd
for help and a mighty wind began to blow. The stormy wind lifted up the
two infidels on high and kept them suspended in the air, where the birds tore
off their flesh with beaks and talons until their bones fell to the ground.
The fame of Zartusht had circulated abroad and it reached the ears of king
Gushtasp. The king became anxious to see the new prophet of Ohrmazd and
when he heard that the beloved of Ohrmazd was coming, he set out from
Balkh with a numerous retinue to receive him. The king invited the sages and
philosophers to his court and no less than sixty obeyed the royal command.
When Zartusht entered the council hall he had a blazing fire in his hand
which did not hurt him. He passed the fire to the king and courtiers who
held it by turn in their hands and were, likewise, not hurt. On being asked to
produce a miracle to testify his statements, Zartusht asked molten brass to be
poured on his bosom. This was done four times and there was no trace of
burning left. The king ordered the wise men to enter into discussion with
Zartusht. The sages questioned and Zartusht answered. They argued and he
replied. For three days these sages, who had not their equals in the seven
zones of the earth, put subtle questions both theoretical and practical,
pertaining to this world and the next, and Zartusht gave convincing replies,
supported by a hundred irrefutable arguments and a hundred demonstrative
proofs. When he had thus silenced the sages, Zartusht loosed his holy
tongue and told the king that he was the envoy of Ohrmazd who had sent
him with a special mission to the king. The Avesta, the sacred book, was
given to him by Ohrmazd for the benefit of mankind. It contained the

mysteries of both worlds and everything worth knowing was to be found out
from that matchless book. Zartusht concluded by asking the king to embrace
his religion. The king was impressed with what Zartusht said but he said
that, as precipitancy in such [453] an important affair was not proper, he
would take some time in thinking over the question. Meanwhile he treated
Zartusht with great respect and assigned to him a house adjacent to his
palace. The sages who saw themselves defeated conspired to wreak
vengeance upon Zartusht. They bribed the porter of the house in which the
prophet lived and contrived to place blood and hair, heads of a cat and a
dog, and dead men's bones under the pillow of Zartusht. They found
Zartusht sitting by the side of the king and reading the Avesta to him. They
boldly approached the king and said that the new-comer was a magician and
had deluded the king by the force of charms, and added that if the king
required to ascertain the truth let him send his men to his house and see
what foul things generally used in magic were stored there. The king ordered
the soldiers to repair to the house of Zartusht and examine its contents.
They soon returned with the impure things and exposed them to the royal
view. The king was enraged, he threw away the Avesta, and sent Zartusht to
prison in chains. A loaf of bread and a pitcher of water were carried to him
daily by a porter and Zartusht remained in chains both day and night. A
week thus passed and it was discovered that the fore and hind feet of a
favourite royal steed were drawn up into his belly. The king was in great
affliction and summoned the skilled surgeons to cure the horse. All possible
remedies were applied but they failed to produce any benefit. The king was
so grieved that he did not partake of any food. General mourning prevailed
at the royal court. When Zartusht learnt from the porter about the malady of
the horse, he sent a message to the king that he could restore the health of
the royal horse. The king ordered Zartusht to be brought into his presence.
He seated him by his side and said that if he could restore the steed to
perfect health, he would believe him to be a true prophet, sent by Ohrmazd.
Zartusht demanded that if the king engaged to perform four things he would
behold again the fore and hind legs of the charger. The king readily
accepted Zartusht's conditions. The first condition made by Zartusht was
that the king should make his heart and tongue of one accord and, without
doubt and equivocation, speak with the tongue and repeat with the heart
that Zartusht was the prophet and messenger sent by God. The king agreed

and Zartusht addressed his prayer to Ohrmazd and rubbed the right foot of
the [454] horse with his hand and to the great joy of the king and courtiers
and soldiers, it straight away came out. Zartusht then demanded that the
king should command prince Isfendiar to gird up his loins to propagate the
faith of Ohrmazd. This being accepted, Zartusht invoked Ohrmazd and the
right hind leg came out. The prophet's third demand was that the queen
should embrace his faith. The queen accepted the faith with heart and soul
and in all sincerity and Zartusht prayed and the other hind leg came out.
Then the prophet asked the king to call the porter and inquire of him how
the things for magical preparations entered his house. The king told the
chamberlain that he would save his life if he confessed the truth. The
unfortunate chamberlain did save his life by giving out the truth. Zartusht
recited the sacred formula and the other fore-foot came out and the swift
charger once again stood on his legs. The king kissed the head and face of
Zartusht, begged his pardon and seated him on the throne near himself.
Zartusht then cured the father and brother of king Gushtasp of the serious
maladies for which the physicians had declared their helplessness. The king
now asked Zartusht to secure for him four boons from Ohrmazd. The first
was that he should behold his own state in the next world, the second was
that his body should be invulnerable, the third that he might learn all
mysteries of life, and the fourth that his soul might remain united to his body
until the day of judgment. Bahman, Ardibahisht, Azar Khurdad, and Azar
Gushasp dressed in green, and fully armed, came on horseback to the court
of Gushtasp. They declared that they were the envoys of God, who had
commissioned them to give the king the divine message that Zartusht was
the prophet of God and the king should acknowledge him as such. The king
bowed his head and said that he was the Lord's servant and had girt up his
loins to execute his commands. The divine messengers then departed. The
king then told Zartusht that he devoted his body and soul and wealth to
him. The prophet blessed him and invoked Ohrmazd to grant the boons that
the king desired. He performed the ceremony and gave the consecrated wine
to the king. When the king drank it, he became insensible and rose not for
three days. During this period his soul ascended to the heaven, traversed the
heavenly regions, and saw his own place in paradise. Zartusht then gave the
consecrated milk to [455] Peshotan who became deathless to the day of
judgment. To Jamasp he gave the hallowed perfume, which gave him the

universal knowledge of existence from the beginning of the world to its end.
A grain of the consecrated pomegranate was given to Isfendiar. He ate it and
instantly became brazen-bodied. The prophet thus divided the four boons
between Gushtasp and three of his near and dear ones, because, as he told
the king, it was not proper to confer all the four incomparable boons on one
individual.11
11 ShN. 5.33-37; Shahrastani, tr. Haarbriicker, 1.283; ZtN. p. 498-511;
Mirkhond, tr. Shea, p. 284-288; Db. 1.244-260; Gottheil, References, p. 40, 41,
50; Jackson Zoroaster, p. 56-80.
Zartusht, the writers tell us, planted a marvellous cypress-tree in the firetemple at Kishmar in commemoration of the acceptance of his religion by
king Gushtasp.12 Gushtasp ordered twelve thousand cow-hides to be tanned
and made as fine as the skin of the gazelle. He had the sacred texts inscribed
upon these in gold and silver and deposited them at Istakhar.13
12 ShN. 5.27, 28, 34, 35; Db., 306-309; Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 80, 217.
13 Mirkhond, tr. Shea, p. 285; Gottheil, References, p. 37.
Zartusht's fabled religious debate with Indian and Greek sages. It is said
that there lived a great sage named Changranghacha in India at this time. He
claimed many foreign pupils of distinction and Jamasp was one of them.
When the news of the conversion of king Gushtasp reached him he wrote an
epistle to the king and dissuaded him from embracing the new faith. On the
invitation of the king, the great philosopher came to Balkh with his disciples
to hold a disputation with Zartusht and refute his doctrines. Learned men
from various parts of the country attended the great debate. Before the sage
propounded his questions, Zartusht ordered one of his disciples to read a
Nask. Herein were already recorded all the questions that the Indian sage
was to ask as well as the answers to them. The sage was utterly confused and
he saw that the new prophet had premonition and he knew beforehand what
particular questions would be put to him. He acknowledged his defeat and
accepted Zartusht as the prophet of God. He embraced the new religion,
took a copy of the Avesta with him to India and converted in a short time
eighty thousand people to the religion of the Iranian Prophet.
When the news that Changranghacha was defeated by Zartusht [456]
reached abroad, another Indian controversialist, Bias by name, came to the
court of Gushtasp. The king organized a great assemblage to which the

learned men came from distant lands. Bias opened the debate and addressing
Zartusht said that he had heard that the wise Changranghacha had adopted
the new faith. He had heard in his country, of the many miracles performed
by the new prophet, therefore he challenged him to disclose the secret
thoughts he had kept pent up in his bosom and had not transferred from his
heart to his lips. Zartusht, thereupon, took out a book that God sent to him
before the coming of Bias to Iran. He then read out all that was concealed in
the heart of Bias, with the appropriate explanations. Bias was at once
convinced of the superhuman wisdom of Zartusht and became an ardent
follower of his religion. Tutianush or Niyatus was the other philosopher who
was sent by the eminent sages of Greece to interrogate the prophet about
the tenets of his faith. The distinguished Greek seer was at once convinced
of the divine insight of Zartusht when he beheld his face. Zartusht asked him
to keep in his heart whatever he desired to inquire, for God had already
acquainted him with it. One of his disciples then read out aloud all that was
in the mind of Tutianush. The Greek sage adopted the faith and king
Gushtasp appointed him the head of the priests in his country, where he
propagated Zartusht's religion.14
14 Desatir, tr. by Mulla Firuz Bin Kaus, p. 2.120-144, Bombay, 1818; Db.,
1.276-283; Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 85-90.
Zartusht's death. When Arjasp invaded Balkh for the second time, king
Gushtasp, as the Persian writers record, was partaking of the hospitality of
Zal in Seistan. A Turk named Tur-baratur entered Zartusht's oratory and the
prophet received his martyrdom by his sword. Zartusht, however, threw the
rosary that was in his hand at the assailant. An effulgent splendor proceeded
from it and its fire at once consumed him.15
15 ShN. 5.92; Db., 1.371, 372; Jackson, Zoroaster, p. 130, 131.
[457]
CHAPTER XLIX
PERSIAN WORKS ON ZOROASTRIANISM
Rivayats, or codes of usages and rituals. We have again to pass over a
period of about three centuries, or from about the thirteenth century to the

latter part of the fifteenth century, before we come across a further record of
literary activity. After the convulsions that the small band of fugitives
experienced, they had settled down as the tillers of the fields, sellers of liquor
and toddy, as minor traders and merchants, or as members of petty
professions. By this time, however, the Parsis of Gujarat had begun fairly to
prosper. Some of them had even succeeded in building up modest fortunes,
and had spread abroad their fame for liberality. This beginning of the
economic welfare of the community shows the first signs of the new life, and
among these signs was the fact that the community began eagerly to turn its
attention to the necessity of gaining authentic information on the religious
questions about which they were in doubt. The Parsis of India thought that
their co-religionists living in Persia must be better informed on religious
matters than themselves, and must have preserved the old-time tradition
more faithfully than they themselves did. They therefore drew up certain
religious questions on which they needed enlightenment, and in 1478
commissioned a daring Parsi to go to Persia and lay their questions before
the learned Dasturs of their fatherland. The news that a band of fugitives
lived in India who were one in faith with them, and shared their common
traditions, had long since filtered through to the Zoroastrians of Persia. In
fact it is possible that the connection between the two bands of the faithful,
though imperfect, had never been quite broken. Intercourse through trade, as
well as other factors, must have helped to keep up some connection. Great,
therefore, was the enthusiasm caused by the fresh opening of a closer
communication with them; and for nearly three centuries (1478-1766), a
more immediate interchange of views took place between the Zoroastrians of
India and Persia. [458] No less than twenty-two messengers had left India
during this period with questions pertaining to ritual observances,
ceremonial ablutions, purificatory rites, forms of worship, rules of adoption
and marriage and other miscellaneous subjects. These collections of
traditions, customs, and rites, arranged in the form of questions and answers,
are composed in Persia, which became the literary language of the Parsi
scholars under the influence of the Moslem rule in Gujarat. These
compilations are called Rivayats, and provide a wealth of information on
liturgical and social matters.1 Side by side with a score of important subjects,
the disquisitions sometimes fall to the level of barren theological
disputations. Among such discussions, for example, were points like these:

Whether the Avestan texts could be copied with ink prepared by a nonZoroastrian, whether the faithful be polluted by conversing with the nonZoroastrians while they are carrying a dead body, whether a Mobad who has
eaten clarified butter prepared by a non-Zoroastrian can ever regain bodily
purity by means of ceremonial ablutions.
1 The dates of the Persian Rivayats in Studies in Parsi History, by S. H. Hodivala, p.
276-349, Bombay, 1920; Darab Hormazyar's Rivayat, edited by M. R. Unvala,
with an introduction by J. J. Mody, 2 vols; The Persian Rivayats of Hormazyar
Framarz and others by B. N. Dhabhar; Darab Hormazdyar's Rivayat by J. J. Mody,
in the Journal of K. R. Cama Oriental Institute, 23. 109-238. Theology of the
period. Bundahishn and Sad Dar, Jamaspi and Arda Viraf Namah inspired
the clergy and laity in their conduct of life at this period rather than did the
Gathas and other Avestan works. The formal rather than the spiritual, the
concrete rather than the abstract, seem to be the prominent feature of the
beliefs that we can glean from the Rivayats. The hope of the joys of a
materialized heaven and the fear of the sufferings of a physical hell guide and
control man's life upon earth. Man's soul and his Farohar are taken, in the
Rivayats, for one and the same. The souls and not the Farohars are believed
to come down on earth on their monthly or yearly anniversaries. The souls
of the righteous persons descend on the earth and remain here for full ten
days of the Farohar festival, but the souls of the wicked ones are given only
five days' leave of absence from hell to visit their earthly homes. If the souls
are properly propitiated, they rejoice and bless; if not, they complain and
curse. It came to be believed that the Yasna sacrifices [459] offered in the
name of Farohars, or of the angel Hom, or of those of Zartusht, Gushtasp,
and other sainted dead persons, could thwart the evil designs of their
enemies; could rout the demons and fairies; could oppose the tyrant kings;
could withstand famine and plague, retard the evil consequences of bad
dreams, gain favour of kings and noblemen, and secure various advantages.
We are informed, moreover, that the reason of consecrating a set of white
garments on the fourth day after death is to provide a corresponding
heavenly garment to the soul in the next world; because, we are told, the
soul is quite naked, when it is liberated from the body at death, and is
naturally ashamed to enter the assembly of the heavenly souls who are all
clad in fine raiment. The souls are awarded heavenly garments in proportion

to what is consecrated to them by their kinsmen in this world. The richer the
quality of the garment consecrated here, the finer the raiment bestowed
upon the soul in heaven.
Bull's urine, or golden water, as it is now called, has been an indispensable
article in the purificatory rites and ceremonial ablutions among the
Zoroastrians from the earliest times. From the strong belief in the efficacy of
its giving external bodily purification, it was but a step to the idea of
attributing to it the power of purifying the internal nature of man. A most
extravagant sanctity came to be attached to the drinking of it. Elaborate
rituals are now performed over the liquid and the drinking of this
consecrated fluid form an indissoluble part of certain Zoroastrian
ceremonials. The Rivayats tell us that the drink gives divine glory, and makes
man's inner nature as bright and as pure as the sun.
Bull's urine has been, since ancient times, an essential auxiliary of spells or
formulas used to exorcise those possessed by evil power; but the original
Avestan and Pahlavi word gaomaeza or gomez fell into disuse by the Rivayat
time, and the term nirang, which originally meant spell only, now signifies
both spell and bull's urine, and henceforth conveys both the meanings. Such
in general is the view that we gather from the Rivayats regarding the
conditions prevailing in that period.
Other works in Persian. Besides the Rivayats, several works, both in prose
and in verse, have reached us. The most important of these is the Zartusht
Namah or Book of Zartusht composed in verse by Zartusht Bahram Pazdu in the
thirteenth [460] century.2 The account of the life of the prophet is based
upon the Pahlavi works. Several Pahlavi works are rendered into Persian. The
Avestan texts are translated into Persian with the help of their Pahlavi
version. A considerable devotional literature and treatises on miscellaneous
subjects are extant. There are about forty short prayers in verse and gazal
form, called Monâjâts composed by about a dozen different priests. The
earliest in point of time are the four hymns attributed to the authorship of
Zartusht Bahram Pazdu, the author of the Zartusht Namah. The latest are
composed in the third quarter of the last century.
2 West, GIrPh. 2.122, 123; Eastwick, tr. in English in Wilson's Parsi Religion,

p. 477-522; Rosenberg, Le Livre de Zoroaster.
[461]
CHAPTER L
MYSTICS AND MYSTICISM
To know God one must become God is the dictum of mysticism. Religions
have looked to divine revelation as the real source of divine wisdom. The
faculties of the human mind, it is believed by men of mystic temperament,
cannot give the true knowledge of God. Knowledge gathered through the
senses is illusive. Reason is not capable of comprehending God. To attempt
to see him through the medium of reason is to lose him. Intuition is higher
than reason. Though reason may conduct the adept to the divine portal,
intuition alone can enable him to penetrate into the sanctuary and have a
vision of God. Human intelligence is debarred from entering this inner
sphere. Divine wisdom dawns upon the mind when it renounces its own
thoughts and reflection, and loses all self-consciousness. In such an entirely
passive and receptive state of ecstasy, the mind is divinely illumined. It is the
outcome of immediate contact of the pure mind with God. The mind that
yearns to know God must seek its union with the divine mind. The
transcendental insight gives a supra-rational apprehension of divine wisdom.
Truth dawns thus upon him, and shines in its effulgence, while an ecstatic
insight is aroused in him and in a moment of ecstasy, when the devotee
transcends all self-consciousness, the wave of the occult light surges in upon
him, and the mysterious something sweeps, like a meteor, over his soul
giving a sudden flash that illumines the inner world. The nightingale in its
transport of joy sings to the glory of God, until it becomes half frenzied.
When the mystic is bathed in devotion, he is so intoxicated with the divine
wisdom that he thinks himself one with the Divine. In this condition the
devotee does not meditate upon God, he feels him; he does not think of
God, he owns him.
The allegorical method of interpreting religious texts. From very early
times some theologians of both the East and the West [462] have maintained
that the prophets adapt themselves to the mode of thinking of the masses
and use parables and legends to express their views. The sacred texts, they

say, are written in a way which contains a double meaning, the one is the
surface meaning, which can be understood by the masses, and the other is
the inner or hidden meaning meant for the initiated. The Sophists and Stoics
resorted to the method of allegorically interpreting Greek mythology to
meet the attacks of sceptical criticism. The Alexandrian Jewish and Christian
theologians, Philo and Origen, spoke of the literal and spiritual meanings of
the sacred books. The first, they wrote, was the bodily part of the text meant
for the majority and the second was its spiritual part which was understood
by those few who could find the revealed kernel, hidden by God in the outer
textual shell. The Gnostics and the Neo-Platonists thus attempted to explain
Oriental and Occidental myths by allegorical interpretation. The Ismailis,
the Sect of the Seven and other schools that flourished in Iran from the ninth
century, called themselves the Bâtinis or the esoterics as opposed to the
Zâhiris or the exoterics or literalists. Their method of interpreting the sacred
texts on the allegorical basis is called tâ’wil.
This method of interpreting religious texts persists throughout the various
periods of the history of the religions of the world. Legends and myths,
traditional dogmas and superstitious customs, historical errors and textual
discrepancies, primitive beliefs and practices are all invested with the
mysterious meanings. Statements which often repel both intelligence and
conscience find an easy expedient in allegory. The esoterics generally seek in
the sacred texts what their own thinking is willing to find and read in them
what is rooted in their minds. They read the subjective meaning into the
texts and draw unwarranted implications from them. Forces of nature,
animate or inanimate objects are all given a new meaning and explained as
symbolizing some ethical idea, some aspects of man's consciousness, some
expression of the divine in man. Rational explanations are attempted for
apparently absurd customs to preserve them against rational criticism.
Symbolic significance is attached to puerile legends. Unbridled by the
canons of reason and undeterred by any regard for historical sense and
critical acumen, the esoteric interpreters of religions generally produce
allegorizing extravagances.
[463] Desatir and Dabistan. In the early part of the last century appeared
the text and translation of the Desatir, alleged to have a heavenly origin, and
to have been written down in the reign of Khusru Parviz and thus to throw a

flood of light on Zoroastrianism. A very heated controversy was the result of
the appearance of this work. One party of eminent European scholars
declared it to be a fraudulent forgery, while others of equal eminence
endeavoured to prove its authenticity. The claim of the Desatir to have been
written in a celestial language was put to a crucial test. Patient research has
since declared the book to be an exotic, outside the pale of Zoroastrianism.
And so it has been held by all Iranian scholars both of East and West.1
1 Bharucha, in Zartoshti, vol. 3, p.121-134;179-191; vol.4, p.257-279,
Bombay, 1275 A. Y.
In this work are given the teachings of various mystic schools, and the entire
treatise breathes a totally different atmosphere from that of the genuine
Zoroastrian works, being divergent in tone from the true spirit from its very
beginning to its close. The Iranian scriptures of all periods have recognized
Gayomard as the primeval man, who was the progenitor of the human race,
and who, first among mortals, heard the divine word of Ohrmazd.1a But this
work, on the contrary, gives a regular hierarchy of prophets who are
supposed to have preceded the first man. God first revealed his secrets to
one Mahabad, who was followed by thirteen other prophets in the former
cycles of time bearing his name. Through them the supposed revelation
came down to Gayomard and his descendants. It is alleged in this book,
moreover, that all the early Pishdadian kings conformed to this religion of
Mahabad, until the time that Zoroaster came and preached his
fundamentally new religion. But even the new prophet's religion, we are told,
was so glossed over by the Yazdanians, the followers of Mahabad, that
Zoroastrianism was ultimately made to confer to the Mahabadian code.2
1a Yt. 13.87. 2 Dabistan, tr. Shea and Troyer, vol. 1, p. 30.
Another Persian work entitled Dabistan, or School of Manners, written in
India by Mohsan Fani in the seventeenth century, draws the greater part of
its materials from the Desatir. The author of this composition mentions some
fourteen sects into which he finds the Zoroastrians of his day divided. These
are the Sipasian, Abadian, Jamshaspian, Samradian, Khodaiyan, [464]
Radian, Shidrangian, Paikarian, Milanian, Alarian, Shidabian, Akhshiyan,
Zardushtian, and Mazdakian. Several of these sects are stated to have
flourished from very remote times, going back to the Pahlavi and Avestan
periods, nay stretching even back to a period of which history has not a
word to tell. With the exception of these two works, however, we have no

inkling of other sects in the genuine Iranian texts. The statements contained
in them are not corroborated by any authority in the writings of the
Zoroastrian priests. They do not mention them by name, they are entirely
unaware of their existence. The account of the majority of these sects, as
found in the Dabistan, is very meagre. We meet with some attempts in them
to explain the primordial principle from which creation came into being, and
we have some sort of crude metaphysics grafted on physics. Sun, fire, air,
nature, water, and earth are alternately put forward as having been the
physical sources of existence according to various schools of thinkers.3
Others still preach a strict monism, and assume that the world of phenomena
was caused by illusion.4 The teachings of the Yazdanians and others are
characterized by a belief in metempsychosis, as well as in the efficiency of
rigorous austerities and ascetic virtues. Our present concern, however, is
with the author's account of the Zoroastrian mystics, and we shall now turn
to the matter immediately.
3 Vol. 1, p. 202-207.
4 Ib., p. 195.
Zoroastrian mystics. At this period we meet with some Parsi thinkers who
were not satisfied with the formal side of religion, and looked with
indifference upon the ritual observances, Outward formalism and literal
interpretation of the teachings of the prophet failed to meet with the
longings of these men of mystic temperament. They ever remained in search
of mysteries hidden beneath the outward garb of dogmas and rituals. The
Parsi priesthood could not satisfy the wants of such ecstatic enthusiasts.
They revolted from authority, and set about thinking for themselves. These
dissenters as a body lived a life different from that led by their neighbours.
Many of them found consolation in the teachings of the Hindu Yogis and
became their willing disciples. Under these circumstances we have to turn to
the Dabistan for the general information of this sect, as the historic Parsi
works are silent over the question and do not even notice its existence.
[465] Azar Kaivan and his disciples. The author of the Dabistan gives us an
elaborate account of the Zoroastrian mystics whom he met in Patna, in
Kashmir, and in Lahore during the seventeenth century.5 The most illustrious
of these mystic teachers was Dastur Azar Kaivan who came from Persia and

settled in Patna,6 and lived for years in seclusion far from the public gaze.7
Some of the most prominent disciples of this recluse sage were the Mobads
Farzan Bahram of Shiraz, Hushiyyar of Surat, Sarosh, and Khuda Jui. They
extravagantly trace their lineage back to Ma-habad, to Sam, Godrej, Rustam,
Jamasp, Zoroaster, and Noshirvan. Let us now pass on to a brief notice of the
literary activity of these hermit priests.
5 Vol. 1, 108, 115, 118, 119, 122, 123; vol. 3, 204. 6 Vol. 1, 89.
7 Vol. 1, 93.
Mystic literature during the period. These Parsi mystics composed several
treatises in Persian, which, as we have already seen, was the literary medium
of this period. Among the more important works that have thus come down
to us are Jam-i Kaikhusru, Makashefat-i Kaivani, Khishtab, Zaredasht Afshar,
and Zindah Rud. The author of the last three allege that their works are
translations into Persian from the original Pahlavi books written in the days
of the Sasanian kings Hormazd and Khusru Parviz. A search through the
literary content of these writings, however, shows that their philosophical
dissertations mostly reproduce the teachings of Greek philosophy, current in
India in the seventeenth century through its Arabic version. For instance, the
Khishtab opens with the prophet Mahabad's descriptions of the four
generative principles of things, which are nothing else but the material,
formal, efficient, and final causes of Aristotle. The authors fantastically credit
the legendary and real kings and princes of Persia with the philosophical
ideas, which on very little examination can easily be traced to their original
Greek sources. These royal personages are styled prophets or seers and
depicted as advancing some original argument for the proof of the existence
of God, his eternal attributes, and regarding other kindred subjects. Even the
warrior heroes Zal and Rustam seem occasionally to have proclaimed a truce
to warfare, and to have devoutly sat down in more peaceful pursuit of
metaphysical investigations; for some of the philosophical disquisitions stand
in their names too.
[466] The alleged twofold meaning of the Avesta. These esoteric
interpreters of the sacred works asserted that Zoroaster had couched his
teachings in figurative and enigmatic language.8 The Zoroastrian scriptures
were accordingly divided into 'Great Zend' and 'Little Zend,'9 the first being
followed by the adepts and initiates, and the second by the masses.. The

figurative language of the former hid the deeper truths from the ignorant.
8 Db., vol 1.361.
9 Ib., 352.
The author, then, cites some instances and explains the difference between
the exoteric and the esoteric interpretations of the Avestan texts. For
instance; when it is said that the archangel Bahman held a conference with
Zoroaster and asked him to close his eyes, the vulgar, according to the
Dabistan, understand that Bahman assumed human form and addressed the
prophet like a mortal; but the adept is to understand by this that the true
essence of man was uncompounded, and that under such a state Bahman
manifested himself before Zoroaster, and his asking the prophet to close his
eyes means only that the spirit asked him to eradicate all bodily attachment
and suppress carnal desires of the flesh in order to enable him to get a vision
of the archangel.10 When the Zoroastrian texts seem to sanction animal
slaughter, it is to be understood as an injunction to kill the animal
propensities inherent in man.11 The author states further that the passages
which speak of the hermits as partaking of animal food in reasonable bounds
are not to be taken literally. These simply refer to the gradual control and
ultimate killing of the animal nature in man.12 The legend that Ahriman
appeared at a season festival in the guise of a glutton and devoured
everything to the utter confusion of the assembly, until he was routed by
preparing a dish from the flesh of a certain red cow, mixed with vinegar,
garlic, and rue, at the instance of some miraculous advice, may be taken by
the masses as literally true. But any one versed in esoteric wisdom, and
acquained with the doctrines inculcated by the Dabistan, knows that the
killing of the red cow stands for the suppression of the sensual appetite,
vinegar for the virtue of abstinence, garlic for reflection, and rue for silent
reflection. All these would kill Ahrimanian propensities in man.13 The
ignorant invest Ahriman with a personality; but, really [467] speaking, he has
no independent existence, for he is not an entity and is simply the negation
of existence.14 The aggregate of bodily passions and sensual appetites is
symbolically termed Ahriman, named from the originator of evil,15 and
Ahriman's predominance in the world is to exist only for a limited time while
the tumult of youth in man and the bodily passions in man are in the
ascendency and until they are ultimately curbed and eradicated.16 Again, the
sacred books speak of Ahriman as the creator of serpents and scorpions. But

these noxious creatures, according to this treatise, are nothing but allegorical
expressions for the vices and passions that haunt the human mind.17 All such
persons as stick to the exoteric interpretation of the scriptures believe that
Zohak actually carried two serpents on his shoulders, but the adept
understand the statement as applying to the venomous tyranny and
sensuality of the wicked usurper.18 The legend of the flight of King Kaus to
the heavens, his fall, and the subsequent restoration of this lost monarch to
his kingdom by Rustam, has likewise an esoteric interpretation. The four
eagles that carried the misguided king high up in the air, along with his
throne, signify the four elements. The throne, explains the author, stands for
the predominant bodily passions, the ascent means that a devotee can rise to
a higher plane of existence by a life of abstinence and austerity, the fall
denotes the revolt of the passions owing to some neglect in the observance
of the ascetic practices, :while Rustam's achievement, in finally bringing
Kaus back from the forest, indicates the flash of proper knowledge that
reclaims the erring aspirant from fatal mishap.19 Thus the esoteric writings
veil the truth from the gaze of the vulgar. The real and deep meaning is
hidden within the: outer husks; and only he who grasps this inner meaning
can attain to insight into the secret doctrine. This in fact is a summary of the
mystic teachings of the Parsi ascetics in the Dabistan, based evidently upon
the earlier doctrines of Sufism and developed under Hindu mystic influences
in India.
10 Ib., 233,234.
11 Ib., 65, 66, 74, 75.
12 Ib., 240.
13 Ib., 349, 350.
14 Ib., 360.
15 Ib., 360, 361.
16 Ib., 357,359.
17 Ib., 360.
18 Ib., 55.
19 Ib., 56, 57.
20 Ib., 113.
21 Ib., vol. 1.95, 96, 113, 118; vol. 3, 205, 206.
Ascetic practices of the Parsi mystics. The hermits practised celibacy.20

They abstained from animal food,21 and reduced the quantity of their daily
food, until many of them could live on [468] food weighing ten dirhams, or a
fraction of an ounce, a day22 or in some cases on only one such unit.23 Some
could live without any kind of food or drink for two or three days in
succession.24 Such devotees practised many kinds of austerities;25 and all of
these mortifications of the flesh were undergone in religious imitation of
their Hindu brethren. The chief among such austerities were those of
supporting themselves on the extremities of their fingers from midnight until
dawn,26 and of standing on the head with the feet raised in the air from
nightfall unto sunrise.27 By rigorous discipline some such religious
enthusiasts, we are told, attained the power of suppressing their breath for
three hours,28 or even for twelve.29 They would thus swoon away into a state
of trance,30 in which respiration and breathing were totally suspended and by
this utter self-abnegation the adepts reached the borders of utter selflessness.
Mobad Hushiyyar, once plunged into deep water and remained underneath
for full six hours before he raised his head above the surface.31 These
devotees, like the Indian Yogis, as shown below, are credited with the power
of quitting the bodily frame at pleasure, traversing the spiritual regions, and
returning to the body whenever they liked.32 They laid claim to read the
thoughts of others.33 They are further fantastically credited with the
superhuman power of performing miracles; such as causing the sun to hide
his disk and appear at night, or the stars to appear during the day, walking
on the surface of water, showing themselves in the form of lightning in the
heavens, metamorphosing animals, rendering themselves invisible to man,
assuming various forms,34 appearing at one and the same time at distant
places, bringing the dead to life, or causing the death of the living,
producing food and wine from nothing,35 causing the rains to fall or to cease,
producing giants to frighten others, converting broken pottery into gold,36
disporting in the midst of a burning fire, or swallowing it,37 and such like.
22 Db., vol. 1, 76, 77, 120.
23 Ib., 77, 88.
24 Ib., 122, 123.
25 Ib., 89, 108, 120; vol. 3, 204.
26 Ib., 113.
27 Ib., 123.

28 Ib., 111.
29 Ib., 118.
30 Ib., 1, 84, 85.
31 Ib., 124.
32 Ib., 85, 86, 93,108, 127.
33 Ib., 109, 116.
34 Ib., 107, 108.
35 Ib., 114.
36 Ib., 115, 116.
37 Ib., 117.
[469] Unmistakable influence of Hindu Yogism. All this self-mortification
of the body and the assumption of occult powers sounds unfamiliar to
Zoroastrian ears. The whole fabric of the ascetic and unworldly view of life
is in direct antagonism to the active, and, in the best sense, worldly spirit of
the Mazdayasnian faith. In its every detail, as indicated above, the Parsi
mystic school savours of the strong influence of the Indian Yogis. The Parsi
ascetics of the period seem to have been in close acquaintance with the
Hindu hermits. The author of the Dabistan informs us that Mobad
Hushiyyar conducted him to see some of these Hindu ascetics,38 and he
speaks equally of Parsi adepts who were in constant touch with such Hindu
monks.39 He further mentions a Parsi ascetic who moved about in Gujarat
clad in the garments of a Hindu hermit,40 and who visited the great Sikh
saint, Guru Har Govind.41 Hirbad, a great Parsi mystic, moreover, gave
instructions to his disciple, Mobad Hushiyyar, either to burn or bury his
body, when dead,42 because it mattered not whether a corpse was consigned
to the fire or to the earth.43 Every one of its details shows the total
indifference on the part of these dissenters to what was really true of
Zoroastrian observance.
38 Db., vol. 2, 137, 145.
39 Ib., 146.
40 Ib., 192, 193.
41 Ib., 280, 281.
42 Db., vol. 3, 208.
43 Desa

[470]
CHAPTER LI
RELIGIOUS CONTROVERSIES
Theological disputations. We find from the extent Persian literature that the
writers of this period occupied themselves in minute quibbling and barren
discussions of the ritualistic ceremonies and purificatory rites. There is no
trace of original thinking on vital problems. Their energy was wholly
expended on endless wranglings about dogmas and theological disquisitions.
Questions were raised whether it was essential to cover the face of a corpse
with the penom, or mouth-covering white veil; whether the legs of a corpse
should be folded or left lengthwise, before it was removed to its final resting
place.1 The community was actually divided into two parties over the first
question, and so bitter was the feeling aroused that at Surat the corpses without such coverings were refused a resting-place in the Tower of Silence. The
relatives of the dead had under these circumstances to carry dead bodies to
Navsari for their final disposal. This resulted in the erection of separate
towers for the contending parties.
1. Patell, Parsi Prakash, 1, 23, Bombay, 1888. Intercalation controversy
provides a powerful incentive to the study of the ancient Zoroastrian
scriptures. In 1720 were planted seeds of a controversy' which gave,
however, a real and abiding impetus to religious studies. A learned Mobad
named Jamasp, who came to India from Persia, in 1721, found that the Indian
Parsis were one month behind the Zoroastrians of Persia in the calculation of
their year, and he strongly advocated a reform in the matter. The question at
first did not arouse much attention, but later it developed into a serious
problem that led to a display of strong passion and to the exchange of bitter
words on both sides in the community. Learned priests in each party
zealously turned to the study of the original scriptures, as a source to decide
the matter, and the question was threshed out in detail, accompanied by the
publication of innumerable tracts [471]and pamphlets. While the learned in
the community were thus engaged in ransacking their ancient records, the
masses took up the controversy acrimoniously, resorting to abuses and sometimes even to blows. The Shahinshahis, or the Imperials, represented the old

order, and the dissenters styled themselves the Kadimis, or the Ancients. The
former annoyed the latter by their mocking derision. Social intercourse
between the two became most strained, the community was split into two
sects, and separate places of worship were founded. The division of the
community into two sects endures to the present day, but despite the
differences obtaining between the two, time and the growth of education
have obliterated the bitter feelings. Modern researches have proved that
both the parties were wrong in their calculations. The accidentals of the
controversy have changed during the long period of hard-fought battles, but
the main question has still remained as unsettled as before. Among the chief
causes that have contributed to the indefinite postponement of the reform
are the indifference and apathy of the community. The question is looked at
with misgivings, as not falling in the arena of practical reform, because
fraught with many complications. What we are more concerned with is, that
the controversy gave new life to literary activities, and encouraged studious
habits among the learned.
[472]
CHAPTER LII
AN EPOCH-MAKING ERA IN THE HISTORY OF ZOROASTRIAN
RESEARCHES
Introduction of Iranian studies in the West. The inexorable decree of
Providence had ruled that a new light from the West should dispel the
darkness that had surrounded the pages of the sacred scriptures for ages, and
add to their better understanding and elucidation. European travellers who
had visited India and Persia during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
acquainted the people of the West with the religious beliefs, manners, and
customs of the followers of Zoroaster. Hyde's masterly work on Parsi
religion, which drew its materials from the works of the classical authors and
the Persian version of the Sad Dar as well as from kindred works, appeared in
1700. Some important Iranian manuscripts had been carried from India to
England, and were now shelved as curios in the Bodleian library at Oxford.
Anquetil du Perron's pioneer work. To the energetic Frenchman, Anquetil

du Perron, is due the credit of making the first systematic attempt to study
the Avestan texts and place their contents before the Western world.1
Having come across a facsimile of four leaves of the Bodleian manuscript, his
curiosity was aroused, and with characteristic zeal he enlisted as a soldier in
1754 on a ship bound for India with the aim of bringing back to the Western
world a knowledge of the sacred scriptures of Zoroaster. Unbounded
enthusiasm, combined with the vigour of youth, enabled Anquetil to
overcome the almost insuperable difficulties that stood in the way of his
literary enterprise. Having acquired from Dastur Darab, the High Priest of
the Parsis of Surat, what inadequate knowledge he could get in those days,
he returned home after six years of strenuous work and published the result
of his studies in three quarto volumes in 1771. This [473]publication created
a stir in literary circles, and gave rise to a heated controversy. One school of
thought of eminent scholars in Europe declined to attach any weight to the
Frenchman's work, and denied that the grotesque stuff that he had placed
before the world could ever be the work of so great a thinker and sage as
Zoroaster, stoutly maintaining that Anquetil's Avesta was either a forgery or
that he had been duped by the Indian Parsi Mobads. The falseness of this
view, however, was ultimately shown.
1. See Mody, Anquetil du Perron and Dastur Darab, Bombay, 1916. Western
scholarship revives Zoroastrian studies. The disinterested labours of various
scholars during the subsequent years fully substantiated Anquetil's pioneer
work; and when the closer affinity between the languages of the Avesta and
Sanskrit became generally known, the sacred texts began to be studied in the
light of comparative philology, and the authenticity of the Avesta was
completely proved. The seeds sown by Anquetil have since blossomed into
fruitful trees in the West, but some decades passed after the publication of
his work before Western scholarship penetrated into India.
[474]
CHAPTER LIII
PROSELYTIZING COMES TO BE VIEWED WITH DISFAVOUR

Beginning of the spirit of exclusiveness among the Parsis.We have already
seen that the handful of the Parsi fugitives who emigrated to India after the
final overthrow of the Persian empire in the middle of the seventh century
had to face enormous difficulties in the earlier centuries of their settlement in
the new home. The precarious condition in which they lived for a considerable period made it impracticable for them to keep up their former
proselytizing zeal. The instinctive fear of disintegration and absorption in
the vast multitudes among whom they lived created in them a spirit of
exclusiveness and a strong feeling for the preservation of the racial
characteristics and distinctive features of their community. Living in an
atmosphere surcharged with the Hindu caste system, they felt that their own
safety lay in encircling their fold by rigid caste barriers.
The community was divided regarding the question of admitting lower
classes of aliens into its fold. Though the practice of an active religious
propaganda had thus fallen into desuetude, the question of conversion does
not seem to have died out entirely, for we find recorded in the Rivayat
literature that a heated polemic regarding the subject was carried on during
the latter part of the eighteenth century. With the beginning of economic
prosperity, the Indian Parsis, we learn, were in the habit of purchasing male
and female slaves of low Hindu castes. These slaves, in many cases, were
invested with sacred shirt and girdle and admitted into the Zoroastrian fold
by the priests at the request of their masters. Those members of the
community who were opposed to the mingling of their blood with that of
such a low class of people denied to these converts the full privileges of a
true believer. The contesting parties applied to their coreligionists in Persia
for their advice and decision in the matter. The point made by those who
favoured the cause of the [475]the converts was that the Parsis of India who
owned slaves for their work not only often had them admitted to the
Mazdayasnian faith in accordance with the tenets of the religion, but also,
without and religious scruples, partook of food prepared by them, and even
permitted them, at the season festival to prepare the sacred cakes used for
consecration and sacrificial purposes. It was urged that having allowed the
converted slaves all such rights of a true Zoroastrian in their lifetime, certain
priests as well as laymen objected to the corpses of these slaves being
deposited in the Tower of Silence when they died. The Iranian high priests,
in replying to their inquiring brothers in India advised them in the beginning

to take precautionary measures in all such conversions that no harm should
thereby be done to the religion and to the community. It was certainly an act
of great merit, they proceeded, to purchase alien children and bring them up
as Zoroastrians. It was unfair and highly objectionable, they added, nay it
was an inexpiable sin, to refuse these unfortunate people all the privileges of
a believer after once admitting them into the Zoroastrian religious fold. It is
taught by the scriptures, they argued, that all mankind will be brought over
to the religion of Mazda in the time of the future saviour prophets. It was,
therefore, the pious duty of every true Zoroastrian to help this great cause by
leading all to the path of righteousness. In the face of such commands, they
concluded, those who denied to the proselytes the full rights of a faithful
believer did not deserve to be called Zoroastrians. On another occasion in
reply to a question about the conversion of such low-class people, the
Iranian informant wrote that even a man who dug graves or followed the
profession of burning the dead (two inexpiable sins according to
Zoroastrianism), should be admitted into the Zoroastrian fold, provided his
admittance would not be harmful to the faith.
The fear that the community might be swamped by the undesirable alien
element was a reason why proselytizing fell into disfavour. We notice in
that discussion that the different sections of the community were divided
more on the social side of the question of proselytizing than on its religious
side. The protest was chiefly based against the admixture of racial blood that
the low class of the aliens introduced into the community. The Zoroastrians
of Persia, who were trampled under the iron [476]foot of their Moslem
conquerors and had lived in servile state, saw no objection whatsoever in
receiving converts even from the lowest strata of the non-Zoroastrian
peoples. But the case was different with the Indian Parsis, among whom the
improved social and economic conditions had aroused a keen sense of racial
pride and consciousness of their past greatness. A very considerable portion
of the community, it seems, looked with disapproval upon the introduction
of the undesirable element of alien races into their small numbers. This
strong feeling was aggravated the more through the fact that such converts
who sought admission came always from the lowest classes. Members of the
upper classes of the non-Zoroastrian communities were not heard knocking
at the door of the Mazdayasnian fire-temples seeking admission. The

community was not disposed to any kind of active religious propaganda. The
cases of conversion were consequently confined either to the slaves brought
up in Parsi families or to the children born to Parsi fathers of their nonZoroastrian mistresses. Proselytizing came to be associated with the low type
of foreign element, and fell into disrepute. A beginning of opposition to the
idea of religious propaganda was thus made when the entire question of
proselytizing came to be looked upon by the community with disfavour. No
serious attempt has since been made by the Parsis of India to organize a
proselytizing movement with the sole object of propagating their faiths But
the desire on the part of some Zoroastrians to include in the faith children
born to them by illegitimate intercourse with non-Zoroastrian mistresses, or
by others seeking a matrimonial alliance with alien women and investing the
children born of such unions with the sacred shirt and girdle, has prompted
them to open the question from time to time to the present day. So bitter
have been the controversies thus arising that they have stopped just short of
physical violence.
[477]
CHAPTER LIV
GUJARATI LITERATURE BEARING UPON ZOROASTRIANISM
The last native version of the Avesta independent of the influence of
Western scholarship. So far the Parsi scholars had generally written in the
Persian language, a knowledge of which was limited to a very narrow circle,
and the general public accordingly did not profit by their work. The need
had long been felt of producing theological literature in the language of the
people, and several portions of the Persian Rivayats had already been done
into Gujarati. These were followed during the early part of the last century
by a Gujarati version of the Avestan texts, not from the original, but based
on the Pahlavi, Sanskrit, and Persian renderings. This was the last native
attempt to render the Avestan scriptures into another language through the
medium of the Pahlavi translation. The Sanskrit, Persian, and Gujarati
translators had all successively made their renderings on the basis of the
traditional Pahlavi version; it was left for the modern philologists to
approach the Avestan texts in the original itself, independently of the

Pahlavi rendering though aided by it, and through the methods of strict
linguistic science to give an independent and first-hand translation of the
original Avestan texts. Rendering of other Persian works into Gujarati. The
Persian Zartusht Namah was rendered into verse in Gujarati by Mobad
Rustam Peshutan Hamajiar in the early part of the eighteenth century1. The
Gujarati version of the Avesta was soon followed by a translation of some of
the important Pazand-Persian works into Gujarati. The most popular among
these were Jamaspi and Arda Viraf Namah. The prognostications of the
former treatise fascinated the gentler sex, who were regaled by the recital of
its contents from the lips of the family priest, [478]or of some male member
of the family who happened to know the language. Viraf's account of the
beatific visions of heaven and the horrors of hell appeared in illustrated
lithographed editions. The pictures of the heavenly persons seated on golden
thrones, and of the wicked falling headlong into hell to be gnawed by
noxious creatures, served vividly to bring the abstract ethical teachings,
before the mind of young and old. Some devotional literature, both in prose
and verse, appeared during this period. In the same connection, it may be
added that the episodes of the Persian kings and warriors, handed down from
antiquity by tradition, were rendered into Gujarati, and were most enthusiastically read or heard by all. This helped to bring home to them the greatness
and glory of their ancestors.
1 Meherbanu and Behramgore Anklesaria's Zartosht Namun, Bombay, 1932.
[479]

A PERIOD OF REVIVAL
NINETEENTH CENTURY AND AFTER

[480 is blank]
[481]

CHAPTER LV
MODERNISM VERSUS TRADITIONALISM
The modern world is divided between Modernism and Traditionalism.
Religions rest on divine revelation. This revealed knowledge is static. Secular
knowledge progresses with time and, by continuous research and discovery
in the realm of the physics of nature and the laws of life, creates new
knowledge. It knows no end and is ever new. It adapts itself to the times and
satisfies the cravings of the thinking minds. From the earliest times, religion
spoke with authority on matters relating to the spirit. But there were physical
problems for which the inquisitive mind always demanded solution. Science
claimed to make new discoveries in the realm of physical researches.
Religion adopted science as its handmaid and incorporated the discoveries of
the scientists and the physicists and proclaimed them as the further divine
revelation to mankind to explain physical questions. The crude cosmologies
and cosmogonies of the times when science was in its infancy were thus
made integral parts of the religions of the world. The researches of modern
science have rendered them untenable in the light of advanced knowledge.
The doctrine of evolution has revolutionized man's outlook upon life
throughout the world. Modern science has changed the attitude of the
thinking people everywhere. The intellectual ferment and spiritual unrest
have stirred the whole world. The enlightened youths are driven to disbelief.
They are not happy in the state of disbelief. They are anxious to believe and
secure peace of mind but they cannot honestly subscribe to the beliefs in
which they are brought up. They are disbelievers despite themselves. This
state of disbelief is produced by honest doubt.
Orthodoxy is obstinacy to forget anything old and learn anything new.
Orthodoxy has always and everywhere professed that the doctrines, dogmas,
rituals, and the established views of life that a people has inherited are fixed
and right. All those that dissent from them are heterodox, other than right,
not right, [482]that is, wrong. Orthodoxy has always numbers on its side, for
the average man is temperamentally timid and conservative and is unwilling
to be disturbed in the thoughts and views he has inherited with his birth. He
seeks refuge in tradition and is content to live secure in the dead past. All
that is handed down from remote times and forms the tradition of the people

is sacred. Orthodoxy is jealous of the views it holds and resents all
opposition to them. It aims at making people religious in its own way. It
moves about with prying eyes and spies on its neighbour's conscience and
struggles to read his thoughts. Whenever it is powerful enough to inflict its
will upon others, it clips the wing of thought, gags speech, and cripples
action. The collective orthodox mind controls the thinking of the individual
and drives the dissenters to secrete their thoughts in the lowest depths of
their souls. Orthodoxy makes free thinking taboo and fails to see that high
thinking is impossible without free thinking. Orthodoxy is impervious to the
influence of the times.
[483]
CHAPTER LVI
THE REVIVAL OF LEARNING AMONG THE PARSIS
Awakening of the communal conscience. The advent of the British in India,
and an era of peace, justice, and security of life and property, ushered in by
them, opened a new page in the history of the Parsis. Having a ready scope,
the means of adaptation, and also elasticity in their religion, they now began
to assert their latent capacity, and soon emerged from the obscurity in which
they had lived, to become henceforth the foremost people in India in matters
educational, industrial, and social. They came in the vanguard of progress,
amassed vast fortunes, and munificently gave away large sums in charity.
This unprecedented economic prosperity helped the revival of learning
among the Zoroastrians. The new epoch of the revival of learning gave new
hopes for a period of formation and life. Various educational institution had
been founded, and the Parsis faced the problem of the responsibility of
universal franchise in the world of letters. The average Parsi child of both the
sexes entered the schools founded on European lines by the community
during the first half of the last century, in various centres of Parsi population,
and education on Western standards spread with accelerated rapidity.
The new knowledge profoundly modified the religious conceptions of the
young. The inroads of Western ideas and culture undermined the old ideals,
and modified many of the beliefs sanctified by ages. It was the opening of a
new age for the Parsis, in which they witnessed the waning of the power of

authority and the waxing of the demand for the verification of religious
truths. The transition from the old to the new was bound to be disruptive.
The new spirit that had taken hold of the community stirred it to its lowest
depth. It threatened the community with an intellectual revolt from the new
school. The reaction was bound to come, and come it did. It was violent as
all reaction is apt to be, and it ended in indifferentism. The [484]popular
creed as propounded by the traditionalist exponents and orthodox formalists
failed to carry conviction to their intellect. They wanted to verify their
doubts and refused to believe that which, as they said, was not in accord
with reason. The glowing accounts of the reward and retribution of the
materialized heaven and hell ceased to act upon the imagination of the
educated classes. The imaginings of Viraf failed to exert any restraining
influence over the tendency to sin. The inspired visions of this seer, about
the scenes of the hereafter, depicting the pleasures of the souls of the blessed
in paradise and the agonies of the wicked in hell, which satisfied the spiritual
cravings of their elders for ages, failed longer so to do in the case of the new
generation. The waters of Ardvisur had inundated the regions of hell and
quenched the blazing fire, the horrors of hell had vanished into thin air, and
the apocalyptic account of Viraf no longer presented to the minds of the
enlightened youth what they had to the strictly orthodox. A treatment of the
unfortunate souls, such as was portrayed traditionally, seemed to them
monstrous, and subverting man's idea of the goodness of Ohrmazd. They
thought them to be crude and archaic. The germs of new thought were
sprouting among the young, and they viewed these theological problems
with a changed attitude. They gradually became estranged from all beliefs
that had been instilled into them from childhood. They aimed at reconciling
religion and contemporary knowledge, and bringing religious beliefs and
practices into closer relation with the intellectual ways and thought. Parsi
orthodoxy resented it.
An illiterate priesthood failed to satisfy the intellectual wants of the
enlightened youth. The Parsi priesthood had long before degenerated into
ignorance. The situation was not keenly felt so long as the laity was equally
illiterate. But now when the latter sought enlightenment, the clergy had kept
less and less abreast of the times. During the long period of twelve centuries,
very few priests rose above mediocrity. The priest hitherto had acted as an

intercessor between the layman and Ohrmazd, and through elaborate ritual
had undertaken to gain for him divine help, being duly paid to recite
penitential prayers for the expiation of the sins of the living, and to sacrifice
for the purchase of paradise for the dead. The youth of the new school
argued that there was no more need of the Mobad's mediation between him
[485]and his Heavenly Father. He demanded that the priest should act as a
moral preceptor, a spiritual ministrant to his soul. This, in those times, the
priest could not do. He could not widen his religious outlook and adapt
himself to the demand of the younger generation. The youth now grew up
without religious instruction and gradually gravitated towards indifferentism.
The apathy, callousness, and disregard towards religion on the part of the
educated youth waxed stronger day by day, and culminated in an
atmosphere of agnosticism that withered the beliefs in which they were
brought up. Agnosticism became the threatening evil of the day.
[486]
CHAPTER LVII
INTRODUCTION OF THE WESTERN METHOD OF IRANIAN
SCHOLARSHIP IN INDIA
Parsi scholarship at this period. Up to that time the Avestan texts had been
almost wholly interpreted by the Zoroastrian authorities through the help of
their Pahlavi translations. The original Avestan texts had remained largely
unintelligible without the Pahlavi version. It was not then known that the
Gathas were composed in metre, much less the fact that some other minor
texts were also metrical. The rudiments of Avestan grammar that various
inflections modified the meaning of a word had been a long forgotten fact.
This was due to the circumstance that, owing to the inflectional poverty of
the Pahlavi language, the translators had resorted to the use of particles and
very often had even dropped this only means of indicating the syntactical
relation of words in a sentence, and had contented themselves with
rendering an inflected Avestan word by its uninflected crude Pahlavi
equivalent. Firdausi and other Moslem writers were the sole informants of
the Parsi scholars regarding the ancient and legendary history of Iran. As
these did not record the doings of the Achaemenian kings, the Parsi

community remained without any inkling of the greatness and glory of the
illustrious Parsi kings of the great Persian empire. European history had now
for the first time startled the English-educated Parsi youth with the
information that there once flourished a mighty dynasty of rulers whom the
modern Parsi can claim as his kith and kin. The truth had been denied for
centuries to their legitimate descendants in India and Persia that a Cyrus or a
Darius, a Xerxes or an Artaxerxes, who had carried the Persian banner in war
to the farthest ends of the world, were historically their own coreligionists.
In vain did the august Farohar of Darius hover round the rock of Behistan for
over two thousand years in pious expectation of some Parsi traveller who
would one day trace his steps [487]to this hallowed place, climb the rock to
read the great king's record, make it known to the world, and thus earn the
royal monarch's blessings whispered in the solemn silence by as many
tongues as there were wedges and angles in the letters of the carved
inscriptions. Such, in short, was the deplorable state of Parsi scholarship
when comparative philology came to its aid from the West and opened a
new era of critical study in the field of Iranian researches.
Introduction of the science of comparative philology among the Parsis.
Since the year 1771, when that worthy pioneer of romantic renown in
Iranian studies, Anquetil du Perron, published his volumes containing the
first European translation of the Avesta, or Sacred Book of Zoroaster, great
strides forward have been made in Europe and America in the realm of
Iranian research. The field is now replete with the lasting monuments of
Western scholarship whether in the department of standard editions of the
sacred texts or the compilation of grammars and dictionaries or again in the
preparation of scientific translations as well as in making exegetical,
philological and archeological researches. The service that these scholars
have rendered to the Parsis is greater than can ever be expressed. To K. R.
Kama, Parsi pioneer of the Iranian studies on Western lines in India, who had
studied the Avestan texts in Europe under the German savant Spiegel, is due
the credit of introducing among Parsi scholars the science of comparative
philology and the scientific method of interpreting their sacred books. The
inauguration of this new era belongs to the early part of the second half of
the last century.

Textual criticism brings startling revelation for the Parsis. The first
outcome of the critical study of the Avestan literature, as may be judged
from intimations given above, was the discovery made by the Western
scholars that the grammar, style, and internal evidence of the extant Avestan
texts show that they were not composed at a single period and by one
person, but that they were the products of many persons who worked at
various times. Scholars such as these undertook to determine the
approximate dates of the component parts of the Avesta. The Gathas were
shown to be the oldest in time of composition and the authorship of a
considerable portion, if not all, of these [488]hymns was ascribed to
Zoroaster himself.. The prophet's work, it was said, was continued by his
immediate disciples, and must have extended over a very long period after
him, even though the immediate impression made by Zoroaster himself may
be acknowledged to have become fainter in succeeding generations. The
religion of the Younger Avesta had departed in certain respects from the
religion of the Gathas, and the subsequent compositions showed signs of
degeneration both in substance and style. The simple and abstract spirit of
the Gathas was blurred if not lost, and the development of the later texts
tended to become more complex and concrete. We breathe a different
atmosphere, they declared, when we pass from the Gathic to the Later
Avestan field. Nature-worship, which Zoroaster strove to supplant by a
higher type of ethical religion, was shown to have been reinstated in these
later texts. The masses could not be weaned from the beliefs that loomed
large in their eyes, and thus, the scholars maintained, many practices
abolished by Zoroaster were later resuscitated by the clergy. Startling indeed
were these new ideas that philological re searches brought to the Parsis, who
had been accustomed to at tribute indiscriminately all Avestan compositions
to Zoroaster himself and who never approached their own sacred books with
a historical perspective.
Back to the Gathas was the war-cry of the new school. This critical
estimate of their scripture by the Iranian scholars of the West greatly
influenced the young Parsi scholars in India. They now hailed the Gathas as
providing a self-sufficient religious system in themselves. They claimed to
have discovered the only true mirror in which the genuine teachings of
Zoroaster were, reflected. The Later Avestan texts were declared to render

nugatory the pristine purity. An exuberant outgrowth of dogmatic theology
and ceremonial observances, they asserted, had supplanted the buoyant
simplicity of the Gathic teachings, and simply' represented a decline from
the pure teachings of Zoroaster. The names of the Amshaspands in the
Gathas were considered to be merely descriptive of the attributes of
Ohrmazd. These attributes, they insisted, had crystallized into concrete
beings, thus converting the monotheistic religion of Zoroaster into a
veritable system of polytheism. Tradition, they argued, attributed to
Zoroaster doctrines that he never preached. They advocated a return to the
[489]original purity of the faith by stripping off the accretions that had
gathered round the pure canon of the prophet, thus removing the haze of
ignorance and bigotry that had overclouded the light of their excellent
religion. All this was highly sacrilegious to orthodox ears. Such statements
roused the strong resentment of the community and elicited vehement
protests from priests and laymen alike. The new school was assailed on all
sides. More sober opinion intervened to modify the sweeping assertions, and
declared that while the Gathas, of course, should be taken as the norm, there
should also be admitted into the Zoroastrian canon such parts of the later
scriptures as were in accord with the Gathic spirit; but whatever could not be
traced to the Gathas was adventitious, and therefore not deserving of
acceptance. The problem at once arose as to who was going to distinguish
the authoritative from the un-authoritative and a new controversy opened
amid still more bitter feelings.
A new theory to defend the Gathas from the accusation of dualism. The
salient feature of dualism in the Iranian faith has ever been the chief point
assailed by the non-Zoroastrians, both in ancient and modern times,
whenever they have entered into religious disputations with the followers of
the prophet. They have laid the doctrine of two gods to the charge of
Zoroastrianism. The accidentals of the controversy have varied materially in
their character at different periods, but the main point of contention has ever
remained the same. We have already seen how vehemently the learned
prelates of the Pahlavi period strove to vindicate this characteristic feature of
the Zoroastrian teachings. Far from considering it a weak point, they hailed
it the only possible solution of the problem of evil. Not so their modern
descendants. The repeated attack of the Christian missionaries, and the

strong influence of the Western literature, which hailed monotheism as the
highest category of theology, brought about an unprecedented change in
this belief; and so powerful has this influence been, that we hardly ever find
even at this day any learned Parsi priest or layman marshalling arguments in
vindication of the doctrine. Attempts are now generally made either to
explain it away by ingenious arguments or to speak of it apologetically. Haug
was the first to bring it to the notice of the Parsis that [490]the leading idea
of the Gathas was monotheism. Ahura Mazda, he declared, is the supreme
godhead, who has produced the two rival principles Spenta Mainyu and
Angra Mainyu as his twin spirits. Separated as they seem, they are united in
action. They are indispensable to each other in the formation and conduct of
the universe. They are the creative and the destroying, constructive and
destructive powers of God, and are as inseparable from each other as day and
night. The opposition rests with the two rival spirits, and nowhere in the
Gathas does Angra Mainyu, the Evil Spirit, stand in direct opposition to
Ahura Mazda. This fundamental distinction, he said, is lost sight of in the
late period, and we find in the Vendidad that the Good Spirit Spenta Mainyu
is identified with Ahura Mazda himself, and the Evil Spirit Angra Mainyu
stands in direct antagonism to God. The Parsi scholars who were ever in
search for some new arguments to remove the so-called weak point of their
faith eagerly embraced this new explanation, which, they thought, saved the
Gathas at least from the stain of dualism. If the Vendidad and other later
works introduced it in the Zoroastrian theology, it was a decided fall, they
claimed, from the original pure monotheism. The prophet himself never
taught dualism, they argued, and it is unfair to ascribe that doctrine to him,
for which the enlightened youth had to blush before modern criticism!
[491]
CHAPTER LVIII
CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES ATTACK ZOROASTRIANISM
Indifference on the part of the Parsi youth arouses the proselytizing zeal
of the Christian missionaries. These thought that they could easily turn the
apathy of the newly educated Parsi youth for his own religion to interest in
the faith of Jesus, if they could convince him of the superiority of

Christianity over his national creed. The impressionable youth once secured,
they imagined, would prove a valuable asset in bringing over his enlightened
coreligionists to the Christian fold. Christianity would thus easily spread
downwards among the masses, they thought, if only they could capture the
upper educated classes. The missionaries felt that this handful of the
progressive people, who approached nearest to the Western people in their
modes of living, would ultimately be easily won over to their faith. With this
object in view some of them began to study the Zoroastrian scriptures first
hand, during the latter part of the first half of the last century. They picked
out what seemed to them to be vulnerable points in the Zoroastrian faith,
and exposed them to the ridicule of the Parsi youth newly tinged with
Western ideas. The community was alarmed at this aggression, the more so
when a couple of converts were actually made to Christianity from this class.
Salient features of Zoroastrianism assailed by the missionaries. The
religion of Zoroaster, the controversialists alleged, abounded in absurdities
and incongruities. It was based on the idolatry of nature. The Parsi scholars
repudiated the accusation with indignation, and said that in their reverence
for the elements of nature they never worshipped fire, sun, and such other
elements, but venerated the angels presiding over these noble productions of
God, holding them to be his purest symbols.1 1. A Parsi Priest, Tâlim-i
Zurtoosht, p. 15, Bombay, 1840; Aspandiarji, Hâdie Gum Râhân (Eng. version),
p. 44, Bombay, 1841. [492]An erroneous rendering of Vd. 19. 9 had led
Anquetil du Perron, the first translator of the Avestan text into a European
tongue, to depict Boundless Time as the first principle of the Universe.2 This
interpretation was taken as an unequivocal testimony of the Zoroastrian
scriptures to corroborate the statement of the Greek and Armenian writers
who had alleged that both Ohrmazd and Ahriman had sprung from Time.
Anquetil's mistake was repeated in the works of the European writers for a
considerable time, until it was finally corrected by the unanimous verdict of
the Iranian scholars of the West during the latter half of the last century.
When the Zoroastrian scriptures were adversely criticized by the
missionaries on the ground that the doctrine of Boundless Time at the apex
of existence proved the derivative and secondary character of Ormazd,3 the
Parsi priests repudiated the charge and vigorously maintained that the
concept simply designated eternity and nothing more. Far from being

Ormazd's superior, Boundless Time, they affirmed was his creation. 2. ZendAvesta, vol. 1, p. 414; vol. 2, p. 592, Paris 1771.
3. Wilson, The Parsi Religion, p. 134, Bombay, 1843. More heated was the
controversy that hinged upon the alleged belief of two rival spirits. We have
already seen 'how dualism has been the main question of inveterate
controversies,; we shall here only advert to it in passing When the missionaries derisively called the Parsis the worshippers of two gods, which certainly
they never were, they at once vehemently denied the charge and hastened to
repudiate it by denying downright an objective existence to Ahriman. The
Evil Spirit, they argued, is not an entity, but merely the symbolic
personification of evil nature in man owing his origin to man's errant
thoughts. Outside of man he has no existence at all. He is a gratuitous
invention. The concept of his existence is purely negative, a chimera. He is
man's creation, as are also the infernal host of demons and fiends, which are
nothing more than the lusts and passions of man.4
4. A Parsi Priest, Tâlim-i Zurtoosht, p. 62-64, 83, 84; Aspandiarji, Hâdie Gum
Râhân (Eng. version); p. 35-37, 73, 74. Parsi apologists meet the charges of
their opponents by resorting to allegorical explanations. This attempt at
giving allegorical interpretations of the scriptures was carried still further.
Tradition had always seen some geographical data in the first [493]chapter
of the Vendidad, and modern scholarship had accepted that view; but in
their polemics with the missionaries the Parsi scholars explained the opening
of the chapter by asserting that the act of Ohrmazd in creating Iran Vej, the
first region of the world, was to be interpreted as a mere figurative expression
for religious faith, and Ahriman's counter creation of winter was emblematic
of infidelity. Similarly, the various places said to have been created by
Ohrmazd indicated man's body, and the obnoxious creatures of Ahriman
signified man's evil passions.5 Another instance of the same kind of
interpretation may be cited. Druj Nasu, or the Demon of Defilement is
spoken of in the Vendidad as taking possession of a man who has touched
the corpse of a dog or a man,6 and a minute description is given as to how
the demon is successively driven out from the top of the head of the defiled
person to the tips of his toes, as the ablution ceremony is being performed.
This rite was criticized as being revolting to common sense.7 Instead of

defending it on hygienic principles, the learned controversialists again
expatiated upon the mystic significance of the text, and alleged that the
whole ceremony referred to the internal purification of man, and that Nasu
represented his evil nature, while the successive expulsion of the fiend from
one part of the body to the other, until finally eradicated, meant the gradual
improvement of a man's character.8 Zoroastrianism teaches that the sin of
burying corpses is inexpiable.9 The pulling down of the dakhmas, wherein lie
interred the dead bodies of such men, is a means of the expiation of one's
sins in thought, word, and deed; and is equivalent to the recital of a Patit.10
Responding to a criticism on this passage, recourse was again taken to
declare it as couched in mysterious language. It was curiously explained to
mean that the dakhma referred to the body of man, the corpse stood for his
evil passions, its disinterment meant the expulsion of the evil propensities,
and the final exposure to the light of the sun signified the enlightenment of
the inner man by the divine wisdom.11
5. A Parsi Priest, Tâlim-i Zurtoosht, p. 35, 36.
6. Vd. 8. 35-71.
7. Wilson, The Parsi Religion, p. 161.
8. Aspandiarji, Hâdie Gum Râhân (Eng. version), p. 74; A Parsi Priest Tâtim-i
Zurtoosht, p. 180.
9. Vd. 1. 12; 3. 38, 39.
10. Vd. 7. 51; 13. 57.
11. Aspandiarji, Hâdie Gum Râhân, p. 79, 80.
[494] The outcome of this controversy. The Parsis further retaliated by
seizing upon the weak points of the Christian scriptures and turning them
into ridicule, just as we have seen, the author of the Shikand Gumanik Vijar
did in the Pahlavi period. Theological questions were thus discussed with
acrimonious zeal on both sides, and a considerable polemic literature was

produced. The good that came out of this controversy was that the study of
their own religion began to be prosecuted by the Parsi priests with greater
avidity than before.
[495]
CHAPTER LIX
THE REFORM MOVEMENT
Crusade against the non-Zoroastrian practices engrafted upon
Zoroastrianism. The compromises and concessions made on the part of the
early Parsi settlers in India were needed to conciliate the prejudices of the
Hindu rulers. The Parsis were a handful of people living in the midst of the
teeming millions of India, and even the twelve centuries of their residence in
this country have failed to merge them in the ocean of Indian humanity. This
fact is largely due to their intensely communal spirit, fostered by the dread of
being assimilated into greater communities, and of thus losing their
individuality. But the average Parsi did not fail to borrow many superstitious
customs and habits from the Hindus as well as from the Mohammedans during the later period. The Hindu augur and the Moslem diviner became
important factors in the family life of the Parsis. These seers were called in to
cast the horoscope of the new-born Zoroastrian child; they foretold the
future, administered amulets to heal every sickness and disease in the family,
prescribed charms to ward off the evil eye, exorcised demoniacal influences
from persons possessed by the powers of darkness, and, in many ways,
proved indispensable auxiliaries to a Parsi from birth to death. The mediation
of a Brahman or of a Mullah was often rated higher than that of a Mobad,,
and a Sanskrit mantra or an Arabic kalma was regarded more efficacious for
the purchase of heavenly boons than an Avestan manthra. The Zoroastrian
priest ruled in the fire-temple, but the non-Zoroastrian priest had a powerful
sway over the hearts of the Parsi populace. With rich offerings did the
faithful repair to the tombs of Moslem saints and to Hindu shrines. They laid
their faith upon all altars and turned to strange gods in their extremities. The
grandeur of the Mazdayasnian teachings had faded, and Zoroaster had partly
ceased to be a living force in the spiritual life of the community. [496]Many
alien customs had thus worked their way into Zoroastrianism. These were

hard facts for the orthodox to admit but they were facts all the same. With
the vigour of youth and with unquenchable zeal the reformers of that day
undertook to liberate the community from the thraldom of superimposed
non-Zoroastrian customs, and to wean it from superstitions.
The reformers protested against reciting their prayers parrot-wise in an
unintelligible language. The Avesta language had long since fallen into
disuse. It was not a living language. Yet the belief in its being of celestial
origin, the tongue in which Ohrmazd addressed his heavenly court, and even
that in which Ahriman harangued his ribald crew, had preserved it as the
only true vehicle for conveying prayers. The reformers now argued that it
was meaningless to mumble an unintelligible gibberish which neither the
priest himself nor the layman understood. Ejaculations and genuflexions were
of no avail, when they recited their prayers in a dead language. No amount
of such formulas would affect the character of the devotees and ennoble their
thoughts. A prayer that had no subjective value was no prayer. It failed to
awaken any ethical fervour, for a truly devout prayer should spur the spirit
within to a higher life. This was not possible so long as the priest
perfunctorily droned prayers, not a word of which was understood. The
orthodox vehemently retorted that the Avestan language Was divine, and as
such it possessed inherent magical efficacy. Miraculously composed as these
Avestan prayers were, they had indescribable objective value, it was claimed,
quite independent of the motive of one who recited them. The mere
utterance of the sacred texts, without knowing in the least what they meant,
would produce marvellous effect. The ultra-orthodox viewed the situation
with pious dread and entertained serious apprehension that, if once the
community permitted the use of Gujarati or English compositions for daily
prayers, nothing short of a revolutionary change would come, and with the
lapse of time the Avestan texts would be supplanted by prayer-books
composed in the modern vernaculars. The reformers pointed out that there
already existed some monajat prayers composed in Persian by some of the
learned Dasturs even in their own lifetime, which the orthodox were using
without any scruple at the end of their daily Avestan prayers. [497]A fierce
controversy raged around this question, with the result that the orthodox
went on praying in their own way, and the reformers, neither having faith in
the recital of their prayers in an unintelligible language nor having a proper

substitute to satisfy their demand, went without prayers of any kind. And the
situation remains, in large measure, unchanged up to this very day.
The Avesta text metamorphosed into an ungrammatical jargon. The
reformers further said that the Avestan texts were recited with the most
incorrect pronunciations. In vindication of their statement they quoted
passages from the original texts and put by their side the corrupt formulas in
vogue in the community. An example of this kind may not be out of place
here, and we shall insert the text of Ahunavar, the most important
Zoroastrian formula, first in its correct form and then in the corrupt form
which obtains among a considerable portion of the community up to this
hour. The original formula is as follows :
yathâ ahu vairyo athâ ratush ashât chit hachâ
vangheush dazdâ manangho shyaothananâm angheush Mazdâi
khshathremchâ ahurâi â yim dregubyo dadat vâstârem.
The corrupt form of the same:
athâu veryo thâre tose sâde chide châvanghoise dezdâ manengho sotthenanâm anghyos
Mazdâe khosetharamchâe orâe âiyem daregobyo daredar vâstârem.
This, however, did not trouble the orthodox, for they complacently
remarked that as long as they had implicit faith in what they recited, and
recited it whole-heartedly, it mattered very little whether they used correct
pronunciation or not. Ohrmazd looked to their hearts, and not to their sense
of grammar and orthography. So long as their motives were good, their
prayers were acceptable to the Heavenly Father. The redeeming feature of
this entire controversy has been a growing tendency in the community to
avail itself of the help of the philologist, who has brought nearer home to
them the correct and carefully edited version of their sacred scriptures, and
they have consequently begun to recite their daily prayers from books that
have based their texts on the standard and authorized version of the liturgy.
[498] Too much ritualism, protested the reformer. The mechanical
handling of the ritual, which was as much unintelligible in its real purport to
the priest who performed it as it was to the layman who ordered it, failed to
satisfy the new school. The orthodox maintained that although the priestly

authorities themselves had lost the key of the mysteries of the ceremonies
and were unable to understand their meaning, nevertheless untold good accrued to those who devoutly ordered such ceremonies for their own merit.
They entertained a pious hope that the lost key would some day be
recovered, and the hidden secrets brought to the light of the day. The
reformers urged that a vast structure of formalism and ritual had replaced the
edifice of the simple faith, and religion had simply turned into ritualism.
They dwelt especially on the subjective value of the ritual, and argued that
however elaborate and expensive the ceremony might be, it was of no value
if it failed to symbolize a moral idea for the faithful who ordered it.
Ceremonial observances, they complained, were given greater importance
than moral observance. Righteousness was identified with rituals. They were
only a clothing of religion, but the ethical substance of religion was of
greater importance than the clothing itself. Religion, they urged, does not
consist in laying up merit by ceremonials. The orthodox retorted that the
ritual as such had an intrinsic value and inherent merit, and the more such
rites were performed, the greater was the merit assured to the faithful. The
new school said that these ceremonials may perhaps serve as a means of
conveying ethical ideas to a backward people, but the Parsis were not a
backward people. Hence they did not need them. Righteousness did not
depend upon such ceremonial observances, but upon the purity of man's
inner life. Besides, the ceremonials became an economic drain on the slender
resources of the credulous poor, who incurred heavy debts for their
performance, which was displeasing in the sight of Ohrmazd. The orthodox
declared these statements an Ahrimanian onslaught upon the Mazdayasnian
rites.
The progressives denounced the intercessory prayers for the dead. The
philological researches had for the first time brought to the notice of the
Parsis the fact of the sharp distinction between man's soul and his Farohar.
From what has been stated in the earlier pages, it can be clearly seen how
this essential [499]difference was lost sight of, as early as during the later
Pahlavi period. The soul and the Farohar were taken to be one and the same
by the Zoroastrians before the philologist pointed out the error. Priest and
layman, the learned and the illiterate alike, believed implicitly that the souls
of the dead profited by the ceremonials performed in their honour by their

relatives in this world. The Avestan and Pahlavi passages, which speak of the
coming of the Farohars to earth at the period of the Fravar-digan festival,
seeking invocation and sacrifice, were understood by the entire Community
as indubitably referring to the coming of the souls of the dead.1 1. K. M.
Modi, Kholâase Majdiasne, p. 91-95, 101-106, Bombay, 1853; Suryoday, vol.
2, p. 113-117, 158-161, Bombay, 1868. According to the general conviction,
the supplications offered by the living procured either a remission of the sins
committed by the deceased in this world, or else a specific merit for the
good deeds he had done. It was this strong faith in the efficacy of the
ceremonials to help the struggling soul in either making its way out of hell,
or in ascending upwards through the graded heaven in the next world, that
inspired the loving and dutiful survivors to order elaborate rituals for the
spiritual welfare of the departed. Propitiatory offerings were made, and
penitential prayers were recited to secure a better lot for the souls of the
dead, and the performance of these periodical rites was most zealously
observed. Rich viands were consecrated in the name of the deceased.
Whatever kind of food or drink the departed ones had best liked in life were
specially prepared. On the last day of the festival, moreover, when the souls
were believed to leave this world and return to that beyond, food and drink
were offered them to assuage the hunger and thirst on their return journey,
while money in copper and silver was dedicated to them to meet their
travelling expenses. The recital of the Patit, or expiatory prayer, forms an important part of the ceremonies performed in honour of the dead. The
relatives and friends of the deceased still engage a priest to recite it, and do
the same themselves for the expiation and welfare of the soul when it is
embarking on its journey to the next world after death. The devout generally
keep up this observance daily for at least a month, or throughout the first
year, or in many cases for a still longer period. [500]The reformers took up
the question and said that Zoroastrian-ism enjoined that a man went to the
abode of weal or woe according to his deserts, and that no amount of
ceremonials performed by the living could either mitigate his sufferings or
improve his condition in the spiritual world. His sins could not be atoned for
by elaborate rituals performed in his name, nor would he be one whit the
happier for them. It is true, they further said, that according to the scriptures,
the benefit of the ceremonials performed for the dead accrues to the soul
during the first three nights after death, while it still hovers over the body,

but from the period of the dawn of the fourth day, when justice is
administered to the soul, and it is awarded its special place, the rituals do not
affect its position. Any ceremonies performed after this day, that is, on the
monthly and yearly anniversaries or on any other occasions, are mainly for
the Farohar of the dead man, and not for his soul. In fact, it was claimed,
these rites are more for the interest of the living than for the imagined
interest of the dead. Zoroastrianism, they said, never stood for any kind of
vicarious salvation, for the question of salvation or damnation rested on the
individual's own deeds. Neither would the expiatory prayers recited by the
living wash out the sins of the dead, nor would the propitiatory sacrifices
offered by them induce the heavenly judges to revoke their decision. As the
man sows, so shall he reap, is the immortal truth taught by Zoroaster. Merit,
they contended, cannot be purchased at a price, and sin cannot be expiated
by proxy. It was destroying the true spirit of the prophet's great religion to
entertain such degrading ideas of vicarious expiation which had been
fastened on Zoroastrianism. These scathing criticisms seriously wounded the
religious susceptibilities of the orthodox, who became unsparing in the vehement denunciation of the reformers, charging them as reactionaries with
carrying the religious barque to ruin. They branded the attempts of the
reformers as blasphemous and as an irreverent prying into the divine work of
Ohrmazd. Bitter words were exchanged between the rival parties, and abuses
and invectives, ridicule and obloquy, became rampant over these and several
other controversial questions.
The good sense of the disputants saved the community from being split
into sects. The reformers were termed the [501]Parsi Protestants and were
charged with thinking in terms of Christianity. They were said to be fired by
the sole ambitition of being original, and of setting at naught the
achievements of their elders for the last three thousand years. The reformers
replied that they were simply looking to antiquity for models for their
conduct and were profiting solely by the vast experience of the past. But at
the same time, they rejoined, the orthodox should remember that the
ancients had tackled the religious and ceremonial questions that arose in
their own days according to light that had prevailed in the past. Those of
that day had not done the thinking for all times to come, with injunctions to
the future generations to act in strict accordance with them. They alone had

not the monopoly to think, and had not given the final mandate to acquiesce
in all that they had believed. Besides, a return to the past could not being
unalloyed happiness to the Parsis in the present times. The community, it
was urged, cannot afford to transplant itself back to the age of the Vendidad.
There was no use sticking to outworn forms and seeking to give them a new
life. It was futile to attempt to support delusions, and the orthodox, they
said, should not throw all possible shackles in the way of progress by
hampering and paralyzing the well-meant efforts of the new school. Such, in
brief form, is the story of the opening of the conflict between conservative
and free thought among the Parsis in India, which rent the community into
two sections. The rival parties, however, did not make any formal division
between themselves. The reformers did not. venture to contemplate so
complete a break with the orthodox as would culminate in the establishment
of a reformed Church. The orthodox could not excommunicate the
reformers even if they would. The orthodox had to content themselves with
condemning the reformers, and the reformers by satrizing the orthodox.
Even to-day the main disputes over some of these vital problems remain
much the same as they were nine decades ago, and the battle goes on, still to
be won.
[502]
CHAPTER LX
PARSI THEOSOPHISTS
Inquiring minds seek a deeper meaning of life. At this period of transition,
when the old practices seemed to have spent their force, and the younger
generation was drifting towards indifference in religious matters, there were
other forces at work which heralded the rise of a new class of dissenters.
Those of a prosaic and matter-of-fact turn of mind in the community had
steadily doubted the statements that did not admit of a rational justification,
and refused to believe in anything mysterious and mystical in religion. But
human life cannot altogether be stripped of mystery. Rationalism is not the
whole of human nature. Besides, the state of doubts and disbeliefs that
prevailed in the community could not last long. Man is essentially a religious
being. He feels an inherent need in himself for some form of religious belief

which would satisfy the yearnings of his spirit-that irrepressible heart-hunger
of the human soul. The Parsi priesthood, as custodians of the conscience of
the community, zealously guarded and conserved the dogmatic teachings
and traditions, but they were uuable to work for the adaptation of the
traditional material to the contemporary situation. They were incapable, at
the time, of helping the community in its religious crisis. Persons who
thought that the rationalism of the new school ignored an essential part of
human nature when it discarded the emotional side of man, to which man
was indebted for some of his noblest virtues, yearned for new light. If that
light did not come from within, they would welcome it from without. At this
juncture the Theosophical Society opened its propaganda in India, and a
number of Parsis eagerly embraced the movement.
Parsi theosophists. In the early eighties of the last century the Parsi
members of the Theosophical Society entered the arena of religious
controversy and gave new zest to it. They became a potent factor in shaping
the religious beliefs of a section of the [503]community through their active
propaganda. Hitherto ritual observances, theological dogmas, and
ecclesiastical usages had occupied a most conspicuous place in the religious
controversies. The Parsi theosophists introduced metaphysical themes such
as the nature of Being, a personal or an impersonal God, creation or
emanation, reincarnation, and such like for discussion. This is significant as
an indication of a higher phase in religious polemics. They showed a strong
tendency towards mysticism in religion. They did not flee from the sight and
sound of man and withdrew themselves to the fastness of the jungle, nor did
they mortify their flesh, but their code of ethics comprised the ascetic
virtues, tempered by the spirit of the age.
Custodians of the only key to Zoroastrianism. Zoroaster and his disciples,
the theosophical interpreters said, wrote in a mystic language which
conveyed a double meaning. The exoteric, or surface meaning, was intended
for the vulgar, and the esoteric, or inner meaning, was designed only for the
initiates. The adepts of various periods were the ones who possessed the
mysterious key to the chamber of hidden truths. The last of such Parsi adept
was Azar Kaivan, who died at Patna in 1614. With his death this key was
lost. Occult science alone, it was asserted, could explain and vindicate the

allegorical teachings of Zoroaster. Providence had blessed the founders of
the Theosophical Society with the possession of a master-key that opened
the secret chambers of the hidden knowledge of all religions. The
Zoroastrian theosophists applied this key to Zoroastrianism to unravel the
mysteries of its exoteric teachings. They aimed at an adjustment of the
fundamental Zoroastrian concept according to the standard philosophy of
their society, which was an eclectic system drawing its materials mostly from
Hinduism and Buddhism.
The theosophists summarily rejected the method of the philologist
adopted in interpreting the sacred texts. In their zeal for discovering great
truths buried under the seemingly simple texts, but alleged to be pregnant
with deep meaning, these esoterics often invested legends and myths with a
symbolic significance, and included much in the sphere of serious literature
that could be relegated to the realm of poetry. They alleged that the
philologists, being bound by the fetters of literalism in the interpretation of
the sacred texts, generally took a statement at its face value and adhered to
the surface meaning. The theosophists [504]chose to lean upon the
miraculous and mysterious, rather than to follow the recognized canons of
the method of reasoning. Consequently, the sense of proportion, critical
acumen, the historical sense, accurate thinking, and such preliminary
requisites of modern scholarship became conspicuous by. their absence in
most of their interpretations. Flashes of vague thought came to be regarded
as inspiration, and visions as verities. Passage after passage in the Zoroastrian
scriptures was explained to signify what it did not mean in the original. The
following may be adduced as a specimen: The pastoral people in Ancient
Iran had found a faithful sentinel in the dog, and that animal, as shown by
the Avesta, occupied an exalted place among the Iranians from the earliest
ages; three chapters of the Vendidad in fact were devoted to this
indispensable companion of the household, All scholars in accord with the
traditional interpretation have naturally taken these passages as the
fragments of an old Iranian canine literature. But the theosophists branded
this explanation as absurd, and discerned in the chapters an allegorical
description of conscience and its workings. Space here precludes the citation
of other examples of this kind. When the linguists challenged such
interpretation of the ancient texts, they were informed that their inability to

reconcile themselves to the new esoteric explanations was due to the fact of
not having yet sufficiently developed their spiritual faculties. They were
dubbed 'mere philologists,' 'dry-as-dust' grammarians. Highly pungent
bitterness was marked in the controversy carried on between the two parties.
The theosophists in this controversy denounced the philologists, and the
philologists denounced the theosophists.
Parsi theosophists as champions of the cause of orthodoxy. The advocacy
on the part of the theosophists of the revival of the past, and their seeing in
such a revival the sole panacea of communal ills, whether real or imaginary,
their readiness to allege religious sanction for the time-hallowed customs,
matched with their zeal for ritual, and their eagerness to vindicate the sacred
ceremonies by giving strained allegorical interpretations to explain them,
won for them the applause of the orthodox ? party, who cast in their lot with
them. Inasmuch as the Parsi, theosophists declared that they were working to
bring out the youth of the community from the, trough of materialism, and
[505]endeavoring to defend Zoroastrianism against innovations of the
reformers, they were regarded as the pillars of faith and the guardians of the
edifice of ceremonialism.
Avestan prayers, however unintelligible, were declared the most
efficacious owing to their occult significance. We have already seen the
arguments advanced by the reformers against addressing to God prayers in a
language unintelligible to the suppliant, and we have noted the discussion
that followed. We now need only notice the part that the theosophists took
in the controversy. The syllables composed in the Avestan texts, they
averred, were so mysteriously adjusted to each other in the prayers, that they
produced vibrations on the ethereal plane, when pronounced. The potency
of such rhythmical sound was so great that, like every good thought that
flashed out with strong occult force and sent forth a good "elemental," it
created forms in the ethereal world, attracted good "elementals," and
repelled evil ones. Every single sentence conveyed an occult meaning, and
the prayers composed in the celestial tongue of the prophet and other seers
had an unspeakable efficacy conducing to the welfare of the individual
concerned, but their renderings into any modern vernacular would make
them totally ineffectual as prayers.

Zoroastrianism in the light of theosophy. These followers of an eclectic
philosophy, and interpreters of the divine scriptures through a claimed
knowledge of occult and hidden meanings, applied the theosophic principles
of explanation to the teachings of Zoroaster, and adapted them to the
Zoroastrian theology. Such an interpretation, however, led them to credit
the religion of Zoroaster with ideas that in no period of its religious history
were ever included in its sphere. When these theosophic interpreters of
Zoroastrianism were reminded that the thoughts they claimed to read in the
canonical Zoroastrian works were not there, they argued with a doubtful
historical perspective that if they did not meet them in the plain words, in
the authentic texts, it was because the twenty-one Nasks of the prophet had
not been preserved. If the bulk of the Zoroastrian canon had not been
irrevocably lost, they should undoubtedly have found such doctrines to be
indissolubly associated with the cardinal texts of the Zoroastrian faith. Every
Iranian student knows that the historical sources and records of the teachings
of the prophet that were in vogue at any particular [506]period of
Zoroastrian history have not perished altogether Something of every period,
whether the Gathic, Avestan, Pahlavi, or the later periods, has fortunately
survived the vandalism of the conquering hordes and the ravages of time,
and consequently has come down to the present day. For instance, in the
controversy regarding the rebirth theory, to which we shall advert below,
the theosophic interpreters, having recourse to similar arguments, stated that
we should have found the theory of transmigration of souls taught in the
Zoroastrian works, if these had reached us intact. It might be pointed out,
however, that the fragmentary works of all periods of Zoroastrian history
have come down to us; they contain the authentic teachings on the life after
death, but they all persistently and systematically speak of only one bodily
life on the earth, and never once suggest the theory of rebirth.
Zrvan Akarana as an impersonal God in the theosophic light. The
theosophists attempted a readjustment of the Zoroastrian doctrine of a
personal God, or rather in accordance with their theory of an impersonal
God. Personality, they alleged implied limitation and was a characteristic of
the finite. A personal God meant that the godhead was a limited God, and
therefore an incomplete God. In Zrvan Akarana, or Boundless Time, the

Parsi theosophists saw this impersonal neuter being of whom nothing could
be predicated. This supposititious being was the rootless root from which
issued Ohrmazd. Ahriman was but Ohrmazd's manifested shadow. Zrvan
Akarana, the primeval impersonal principle, according to their interpretation,
was like a central fire from which all creation had emanated. The individual
was only a vital spark, and his final resting-place was in it. Passionately
loving the light, the moth finally immolated itself in the flame; in like
manner the individual had to throw off the illusory shackles of personality
and be merged in the Universal, the One. This doctrine is certainly not
Zoroastrian, because through the whole history of the religion individuality
is not an illusion. It is ever a stern fact. Personality is not an imperfection, but
it is the highest expression of life, that ultimately strives for the divine. Not
the losing of individuality and the loss of the personal self, and not the
weakening of personality, but the gaining and strengthening of it, is the
Zoroastrian ideal. This has been the truth taught by Zoroastrianism in the
striving [507] for the highest aims comprehensible to mankind from the
remotest antiquity. Zrvan was extolled above Ohrmazd, who was ranked by
them as a mere manifestation of Time. The one was elevated by debasing the
other. The personal God who could be loved and feared, who responded to
the gentle aspirations of the human heart, was dethroned to make room for a
monistic principle that might answer the stern canons of cold intellectualism,
but which evaporated into an unthinkable abstraction and mercilessly left its
hapless votaries without a word of solace or hope. Affection, love and
devotion, however, can centre about some personality only. We find in the
authoritative teachings of the Zoroastrian Church that Ohrmazd knows no
peer, and he always sits supreme at the head of the divine hierarchy. These
modern votaries of Zrvan were, however, not to be confounded with the
Zarvanite sect of old, which looked to Zrvan Akarana as a personality as
much defined as Ohrmazd. We have already seen that, in postulating
impersonated Time as the originator of Ohrmazd and Ahriman, the sect
aimed at supplanting Zoroastrian dualism by monotheism, in order to save
their religion from the so-called stigma of dualism. Not so the theosophists,
who grafted this new feature on the pure teachings of Zoroaster. They did
not personify Time, but reckoned this abstract principle of Time as higher
than Ohrmazd himself, because, in common with all mystic schools, they
held the idea of an impersonal God as the highest category of philosophical

thought.
Zoroastrianism declared by the thesophic claim to be incomplete without
the doctrine of transmigration of souls. From first to last Zoroastrianism,
like Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism, shows no sign of this
theory of rebirth. But this dogma occupied a pre-eminent place among the
theosophists, being, in fact, one of the most conspicuous characteristics of
their doctrines. To teach man to attain liberation from the bondage of
rebirth was the ultimate aim of their ethics. It was not regarded by the
theosophists as one of the many solutions put forward by the human mind to
solve the mysteries of the life after death, but as the only rational explanation
that satisfied human instinct of justice, and the only solution of the
anomalies in this world. They persuaded themselves that the theory was fast
becoming a recognized truth in the West, and that, at no distant [508]date,
it would be hailed as an inexorable law of nature proved with scientific
certitude. With a view to investing their statements with scriptural authority
they tore one or two passages from their context, and basing their arguments
on these, they declared that they had unearthed the theory from the
labyrinth of Zoroastrianism. When the Dasturs and other Parsi scholars
asserted, in accord with all Iranian scholars of the West, that in no period of
the religious history of Iran was metempsychosis ever hinted at in the
remotest form, and that the passages referred to had no bearing upon the
question, they retorted that the scholarship of the scholars must be at fault,
for so great a master as Zoroaster simply could not fail to have taught this
fundamental truth. But this was not all. Enthused by a zeal for the theory,
they went a step further and alleged that Zoroaster himself was an
Amshaspand incarnate. This is contrary to the spirit of Zoroastrianism. The
sacred books speak of the prophet as the greatest of the mortals, the most
brilliant among men, even as the star Tishtar is among the infinite stars,1 and
as the noblest soul whose ideal is a leaven of righteousness to humanity. He
is the highest and the greatest ideal of human perfection, the very
embodiment of piety. The Gathas give a distinctly visualized image of the
personality of Zoroaster. His life is surrounded by a nimbus of miracles in
the later period, and most extravagant legends are woven about his
personality, but after all that the human language can sing in his praise, he is

simply a man, and not an arch angel incarnate. So was he during life, and so
he is after death,
xxx

xxx

xxx

xx

xx

xx

x

x

x

1. Yt. 8. 44. These modern successors of the Parsi Yogists of the seventeenth
century have caused several members of the community to drift towards a
growing fondness for occult mystery. Many men and women, with or
without higher education, are seen to-day running after any form of
occultism that they come across. These continue to interpret and explain the
sacred texts on the allegorical basis, With overweening presumption,
common to the occultists of all ages and places, they claim to be the only
correct interpreters of Zoroastrianism and are busy producing a novel type of
Zoroastrian ideological literature.
[509]
CHAPTER LXI
CONCLUSION
And now we have reached the completion of our study down to the present
day. We have traced the gradual development of the religion of Zarathushtra
during the various periods of its history. Nearly three thousand years have
elapsed since the great prophet first gave the message of Mazda to the
people of Iran. Many millions of human souls have lived a happy life and
died a peaceful death under the shadow of the protecting wings of the faith.
Zarathushtra's immortal triad of 'good thoughts, good words, and good
deeds' has kindled the religious zeal, intensified the desire, ennobled the
thoughts, illumined the minds, and warmed the hearts of the countless
numbers of his followers. Throughout its history Zoroastrianism has seen its
bright and dark days, accompanied by the rise and fall of the political power

of its adherents. During these ages, great and mighty kings, in whom was
concentrated the temporal power of Persia, have ruled over Iran. Yet they are
no more. But the one personality in whom was sanctified the spiritual power,
the everlastingly greater than kings, has ruled over the hearts of men in all
periods of the nation's history and will ever continue to rule so in the ages to
come. Zarathushtra, the chosen of Ahura Mazda, does not belong to any
single period and particular people, but to all ages and to all peoples. He is
unchanging. His religion it was that inspired the Iranian nation with the
loftiest of ideals when Iran was at the zenith of her power. His ever
optimistic teachings and the ever cheerful spirit of his sublime doctrines
saved its remnants from falling into the slough of pessimism and gloom,
thirteen centuries ago, when the Zoroastrian community stood appalled by
the national catastrophe that sounded the death-knell of their empire. With
the downfall of the empire the hope of regaining power had disappeared
forever. They could never see visions of its restoration. History has recorded
this one and unique pathetic instance of a great nation [510]of millions being
reduced to a small community of a little over a hundred thousand souls all
told, still true to its ancient faith. Everything that was nearest and dearest to
them in the fatherland was gone. Zarathushtra remained their only hope, and
with his religion as the only cherished heritage, the Parsi exiles sought an
asylum in Iran. Thirteen centuries have dragged their weary course since
they first landed on this the land of their hope and began their life anew.
Rulers of nations they have not become, but they have proved themselves to
be the true bearers of the great name and fame of their illustrious forebears.
The pages of their national history are still thrilling with the noble deeds of
the ancient Iranians, and their dutiful descendants have faithfully reflected
their past national glory in the mirror of their small community. Zoroastrian
virtues have made the modern Parsis great. The community has secured a
pioneer place in the social, intellectual, and industrial life of the teeming
millions of India. They have amassed vast fortunes and have given away
equally vast sums for philanthropic purposes without distinction of caste,
color, or creed. An individual member among the Parsis to-day is a better
cared-for unit than one in any society. The Parsis yearly contribute for his
relief at a rate which no people in the world does for its individual member.
The virtue of charity has been built into the very communal fibre, and is
woven into the tissues of every individual's being. A religion that produces

such results in the practical life of a community well deserves the epithet
'excellent,' which the Mazda-worshipping religion of Zarathushtra is given
in the Confession of Faith. With sublime confidence Zarathushtra foretold to
the Evil Spirit that his religion will ever live and his followers will do battle
with the forces of evil up to the end of the world.1 His noble faith has
weathered the heaviest of storms and survived them; and a religion which
stood these trials in the past will stand any trial in the future. Zoroastrianism
will live by its eternal verities of the belief in the personality of Ohrmazd, an
abiding faith in the triad of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, the
inexorable law of righteousness, the reward and retribution in the life
hereafter, the progress of the world towards perfection, and the ultimate
triumph of the good over evil through the coming of the Kingdom of
Ohrmazd with the [511] co-operation of man. These are the truest and the
greatest realities in life. They are valid for all times. They constitute the
lasting element of Zoroastrianism. In the midst of the accretions that have
gathered round it during the long period of its life, these immortal truths
have remained substantially unchanged, and by them Zoroastrianism will live
for all time. Dogmas and rituals are based upon the needs of the times, and as
such they are subject to the natural laws of growth and decay. They have
their place in the spiritual development of man. They are the accompaniments of religion, but not religion itself. Man may fall away from
dogmas and from rituals, and yet he may remain religious. Righteousness
rests on the individual's piety, and not on a scrupulous observance of
ceremonials, or a practice of elaborate lustrations. Let the Parsi individually,
and his community collectively, abide steadfast in the path of righteousness,
and they will be practising true Zoroastrianism. In the fret and fever of
modern civilization, which renders man exceedingly sensitive to suffering,
and lets loose on him the demons of restlessness and discontent,
Zarathushtra's religion is the best sedative for him to-day. So will it be in all
social unrests, economic crises, and religious upheavals of the future.
Zarathushtra has been the hope of the Parsis in the past. So is he now, and
so will he be forever. 1. Vd. 19. 5.

frajajt pavan darût u shâtîh u râmishnîh.
“Completed in peace and joy and pleasure.”

